106 LAUREATE: A Dataset for Supporting Research in Affective Computing and Human Memory Augmentation MATIAS LAPORTE, MARTIN GJORESKI, and MARC LANGHEINRICH, Faculty of Informatics, Computer Systems Institute, Università della Svizzera italiana (USI), Switzerland The latest developments in wearable sensors have resulted in a wide range of devices available to consumers, allowing users to monitor and improve their physical activity, sleep patterns, cognitive load, and stress levels. However, the lack of out-of-the-lab labelled data hinders the development of advanced machine learning models for predicting affective states. Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge, there are no publicly available datasets in the area of Human Memory Augmentation. This paper presents a dataset we collected during a 13-week study in a university setting. The dataset, named LAUREATE, contains the physiological data of 42 students during 26 classes (including exams), daily self-reports asking the students about their lifestyle habits (e.g. studying hours, physical activity, and sleep quality) and their performance across multiple examinations. In addition to the raw data, we provide expert features from the physiological data, and baseline machine learning models for estimating self-reported affect, models for recognising classes vs breaks, and models for user identification. Besides the use cases presented in this paper, among which Human Memory Augmentation, the dataset represents a rich resource for the UbiComp community in various domains, including affect recognition, behaviour modelling, user privacy, and activity and context recognition. CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing→ Empirical studies in HCI ; Empirical studies in ubiquitous and mobile computing; • Applied computing→ Education. Additional Key Words and Phrases: datasets, affective computing, human memory augmentation, student performance, physiological signals, learning, affect ACM Reference Format: Matias Laporte, Martin Gjoreski, and Marc Langheinrich. 2023. LAUREATE: A Dataset for Supporting Research in Affective Computing and Human Memory Augmentation. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 7, 3, Article 106 (September 2023), 41 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3610892 1 INTRODUCTION In recent years, the development of wearable sensors has advanced rapidly, resulting in a wide range of devices available to consumers. These sensors have become smaller, more sophisticated, and consume less energy, enabling manufacturers to upgrade existing products and create new categories. However, hardware improvements alone cannot explain the success of wearable devices. The advances in the software domain, particularly in artificial intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML), have also played a role in the massification of wearable sensors. Users of these ML-powered devices now have ways to monitor and improve their lives. Physiological signals captured by wearable devices enable users to analyse their physical activity, sleep patterns, cognitive load, and stress levels [5, 78, 90, 95, 106]. Authors’ address: Matias Laporte, matias.laporte@usi.ch; Martin Gjoreski, martin.gjoreski@usi.ch; Marc Langheinrich, marc.langheinrich@ usi.ch, Faculty of Informatics, Computer Systems Institute, Università della Svizzera italiana (USI), Via Giuseppe Buffi 13, Lugano, Ticino, Switzerland, 6900. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. © 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 2474-9567/2023/9-ART106 $15.00 https://doi.org/10.1145/3610892 Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. 106:2 • Laporte et al. The field of affective computing leverages wearable technology and AI to track factors associated with affective states (e.g. emotions, mental stress and cognitive load). While the area has seen significant advancements from the latest updates in hardware and software, labelled data is still one of the main bottlenecks [121] that impede the development of advanced ML models —models that can have significant real-life impact, including areas like digital healthcare [23]. Nevertheless, researchers must laboriously collect datasets to train the models that predict affective states, which is a process that presents several challenges. First, despite technological improvements, the more powerful wearable sensors may still be cumbersome. Sometimes they are intrusive, expensive, or impractical (e.g. with short battery life or requiring frequent data downloading) [3]. The inter- and intra-subject variability of physiological signals present an additional challenge. Datasets need to contain data from multiple individuals across several sessions to achieve robust predictive generalisability, and recruiting volunteers with such constraints is demanding. Finally, some physiological sensors (such as galvanic skin response sensors) are highly sensitive and suffer from movement artefacts, variations in room temperature, and more [12]. These conditions limit data collection settings to controlled environments to maximise data quality. All these challenges make collecting in-the-wild datasets difficult and expensive. Therefore, researchers may be hesitant to share the collected data due to the required effort and financial expenditure. A specific area of interest in this study are Human Memory Augmentation (HMA) systems. Affective computing methods can monitor mental states that are relevant to HMA. For example, physiological sensors have been used for cognitive load estimation [ 51], student engagement assessment [ 26], stress measurement [ 46] and more [35, 55, 113]. Since these mental states impact memory formation and retrieval [10, 14, 81, 118], various physiological signals have also been employed in human memory research [20, 50, 75, 96, 106]. In a university setting, large differences in the measured cognitive load among students may indicate important moments in the classroom for an HMA system. Students with high cognitive load may suggest that they find the content important but challenging. In contrast, students with low cognitive load at the same moment may indicate a lack of focus or loss of interest after struggling with the content. An HMA system could use contextual physiological information to identify relevant moments in a class or when a student was inattentive. Subsequently, it could assist the students in reviewing the corresponding information later. This paper presents a dataset we collected during a 13-week study in a university setting. The dataset contains the physiological data of 42 students and 2 professors (i.e. lecturers) during 26 classes (including exams), as well as daily self-reports asking the students about their lifestyle habits (study, physical activity, sleep quality). The dataset includes participants’ performance in quizzes (scores and answers to questions), assignments, and exams, among other data. The dataset is called LAUREATE: the Longitudinal multimodAl stUdent expeRience dataset for AffecT and memory rEsearch. It is available to researchers after the signature of a sharing agreement1. A snippet of the dataset has already been presented at UbiComp 2022 workshops [36, 67]. In contrast to the initial analyses, this study offers several additions, including: (i) access to the overall dataset; (ii) a detailed description of the data collection protocols; (iii) an exploratory data analysis for the complete dataset; (iv) access to expert features extracted from the raw data, along with an explanation of the pre-processing and feature extraction steps; (v) access to baseline ML models; and (vi) an analysis and discussion of future use-cases in affective computing and HMA. The baseline ML models investigated in this study are models for estimating self-reported affect and moodrelated states (understanding, satisfaction, energy, stress, tiredness, peacefulness, motivation, calmness, enthusiasm, and worriedness) using physiological data and behavioural self-reports (e.g. daily sleep quality and studying hours). We also investigated models that can recognise classes vs breaks using physiological and acceleration data. Such models would be useful for automatic activity and context recognition. And finally, we investigated models for user and device identification using physiological and acceleration data, which in the context of this work 1Please contact the first author for more details Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. LAUREATE: A Dataset for Supporting Research in Affective Computing and Human Memory Augmentation • 106:3 could be helpful for unsupervised user adaptation. In a broader context, data that enables the development of user-identification methods are useful for improving user privacy mechanisms, another vital aspect of ubiquitous sensing systems [65]. In the following sections, we will (i) provide a detailed overview of the related work in publicly available datasets and the main differences with the LAUREATE dataset (Section 2), (ii) describe in detail the methods utilised for data collection —including participants’ recruitment, experimental apparatus and procedure— and feature extraction (Section 3), (iii) apply statistical analysis and baseline machine learning techniques to validate the datasets (Section 4), and (iv) discuss the limitations of the dataset, its potential for HMA applications, future work and other possibilities (Section 5). 2 RELATED WORK This section compares our dataset with publicly available datasets from five related research categories: emotions, mental stress and cognitive load, driver-state monitoring, workplace stress, and studies performed on student campuses. The overview tables contain information about the release date of the dataset, the number of participants, the duration of the study (e.g. one day represents that all data was collected in one day/session), the sensor data available in the dataset, and the experimental scenario which also hints the available ground truth (i.e. labelled) data. Regarding the sensor data, we focus on datasets that provide data from wearable physiological sensors such as electroencephalogram (EEG), electrooculogram (EOG), electrocardiogram (ECG), electromyogram (EMG), blood volume pulse (BVP), electrodermal activity (EDA), respiration rate (RESP), eye tracker, magnetoencephalography (MEG), skin temperature (TEMP), acceleration (ACC), beat-to-beat intervals (RR sensor), and pulse oximetry (SpO2) sensors. In the two final subsections, we (i) discuss related research on human memory (Section 2.6), affect and cognitive load, and (ii) present the main differences between our dataset and the past work (Section 2.7). 2.1 Emotion Datasets Emotion recognition from physiological data is a task that has produced many open datasets (Table 1). These are datasets where the participants have watched affective multimedia in short sessions and rated their experience after each session using questionnaires that provide information about the participants’ emotional states (e.g. discrete emotions, arousal, and valence). The affective multimedia in each of these datasets consists of short movie or music video snippets (e.g. 1-minute duration) that are intended to elicit particular affective states. Various devices have been used to record the participants’ physiological responses while watching the affective multimedia. These research and associated databases are helpful for analysing the emotional responses of participants in controlled settings. 2.2 Mental Stress and Cognitive Load Datasets Monitoring mental stress and cognitive load is another category where researchers have been quite active, as seen in Table 2. In these studies, researchers typically expose participants to cognitive tasks, e.g. N-back task, Stroop test, Trier social stress test, or even smartphone games. While the participants are performing the specific tasks, their physiological response is recorded using various devices. Some of these studies combine emotion-related tasks (watching a set of funny video clips) and cognitive load tasks (e.g. WESAD [99] and Non-EEG datasets [8]). These studies and corresponding datasets are beneficial for studying the participants’ physiological responses to mental stress and cognitive load tasks. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. 106:4 • Laporte et al. Table 1. List of available emotion datasets. Dataset Year S.S. Span Sensor data Scenario DEAP [63] 2011 32 1 day ECG, EDA, EEG, EMG, EOG, RESP, TEMP, face video Valence, arousal, liking, dominance, and familiarity MAHNOBHCI[7] 2012 27 1 day ECG, EDA EEG, RESP, TEMP, video, eye tracker, audio Valence, arousal, dominance, predictability, and discrete emotions RECOLA [89] 2013 46 1 day Speech, Face, ECG, EDA Valence, arousal, agreement, dominance, engagement, and performance DECAF [1] 2015 32 1 day ECG, EMG, EOG, MEG, near-infrared video Valence, arousal, and dominance SEED[129] 2015 32 1 day EEG Discrete emotions MMSE [128] 2016 140 1 day ACC 3D model sequences, videos, thermal videos, BVP, EDA, and HR Discrete emotions Ascertain[111] 2017 58 1 day ECG, EDA, EEG, facial activation units Big-5, valence, arousal, liking, engagement, familiarity Amigos [77] 2017 40 1 day EEG, ECG, GSR, face video Valence, arousal, control, familiarity, liking, and discrete emotions EmgDataVR [44] 2022 38 1 day Facial EMG Valence, arousal, and discrete emotions S.S. stands for sample size. Table 2. List of available mental stress/load datasets. Dataset Year S.S. Span Sensor data Scenario Non-EEG [8] 2016 20 1 day ACC, EDA, HR, TEMP, SpO2 Four stress types (physical, emotional, cognitive, none) Mental Stress [46] 2017 21 1 day ACC, EDA, HR, TEMP, BVP Three stress levels (low, medium, high) WESAD [99] 2018 15 1 day ACC, EDA, TEMP, BVP, EMG, RESP Neutral, amusement, stress CLAS [76] 2019 62 1 day ECG, EDA, PPG, ACC Mental stress, Cognitive load, Arousal and valence Cognitive load [45] 2020 23 1 day ACC, EDA, TEMP, RR 8 cognitive load tasks with varying difficulty levels. NASA-TLX Cognitive load [45] 2020 23 1 day ACC, EDA, TEMP, RR Smartphone game with three difficulty levels. NASA-TLX Stress-Predict [59] 2020 35 1 day BVP Stroop test, TSST, and Hyperventilation S.S. stands for sample size. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. LAUREATE: A Dataset for Supporting Research in Affective Computing and Human Memory Augmentation • 106:5 2.3 Driving Datasets Another research category that produces publicly available datasets is the field of monitoring participants while they drive. Table 3 presents the studies that have produced publicly available datasets. The driving setup can be in a real-life scenario or a simulator. These studies provide valuable data points for developing future smart-driving services (e.g. driver attention management). Table 3. List of available driving datasets. Dataset Year S.S. Span Sensor data Scenario Driving-stress [54] 2005 24 1 day ECG, EDA, EMG, RESP Three stress levels (low, medium, high) Driving-workload [100] 2013 10 1 day GSR, HR, TEMP Perceived cognitive load while driving Driving-distractions [82] 2016 64 1 day EDA,HR, RESP, facial expressions, eye tracking Stress binary + NASA TLX S.S. stands for sample size. 2.4 Workplace Stress Datasets Table 4. List of available workplace stress datasets. Dataset Year S.S. Span Sensor data Scenario TILES-2018 [79] 2020 212 10 weeks PPG, ECG, Audio, ACC, TEMP Hospital workplace. Personality, behavioural states, job performance, and well-being TILES-2019 [125] 2022 57 3 weeks PPG, ECG, Audio, ACC, TEMP Hospital workplace. Personality, behavioural states, job performance, and well-being Nurses stress 2022 15 Longitudinal (1250 h total) ACC, EDA, TEMP, BVP Nurses from an Emergency Room department. S.S. stands for sample size. Workplace stress is another category of research that has provided valuable datasets. Table 4 enumerates these works. Compared to the rest of the datasets, these are recorded longitudinally (e.g. at least three weeks) and entirely in the wild. Two datasets, TILES-2018 and 2019, provide access to behavioural and physiological data from a relatively large number of participants through IoT data hubs, wearable sensors, and a variety of surveys, including personality traits, behavioural states, job performance, and well-being. Similarly, the Nurses’ stress dataset provides access to physiological and context data of nurses monitored during the COVID-19 outbreak. The context data includes information about the stress events (e.g. the period of the stress events and corresponding circumstances). 2.5 Student Campus Datasets The studies that are mostly related to ours are StudentLife and Laughter study. In the Laughter study, Di Lascio et al. also measured students’ and lecturers’ physiological data. Although this dataset has a higher diversity of courses (five instead of two), their experiment only lasted three weeks, while ours lasted 13 weeks. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. 106:6 • Laporte et al. Table 5. List of available student campus datasets. Dataset Year S.S. Span Sensor data Scenario StudentLife [120] 2014 48 10 week Phone usage Students performance University setting Laughter [27] 2019 34 3 weeks ACC, EDA, TEMP, BVP Participants watched funny videos Ours 2023 42 + 2 13 weeks ACC, EDA, TEMP, BVP, Self-Reports Audiovisual Class recordings quizzes, class contents, performance University setting S.S. stands for sample size. In StudentLife, 48 students from one class answered daily and weekly surveys for ten weeks about their lifestyle, mental well-being, and academic performance. The dataset also comprises sensor data from smartphones. Nonetheless, our dataset differs from it by adding physiological data from students and lecturers. 2.6 Affect, Cognitive Load and Human Memory Harvey et al.[53] identified three key features of human memory: (i) "recall depends upon the relative distinctiveness of the target event when compared to its competitors", (ii) "human memory is cue driven" [112], and (iii) "cues captured by lifelogging technology can be used to augment human memory". A memory cue is something (an image, emotion, verbal or non-verbal sound, location, object, etc.) that can jog our memory, helping us recall the original experience. If a system presents to the user an experience — or its corresponding memory cue — at regular intervals, the user will repeatedly recall the experience through time and consolidate its memory, improving long-term retention [57, 91]. With sufficient practice, the user would only need to remember the specific cue to retrieve the full memory of the original experience. Current capture technology could record full experiences and save them into long-term storage, working as a memory prosthetic. These systems would impose additional workload for its users, now forced to filter and select relevant memories. Human Memory Augmentation systems should focus on "selectivity, not total capture" [104]. We believe that physiological signals could be used as input to HMA systems for this task. Mental states and memory are intertwined. Arousal stories are better remembered than neutral stories [14]; negative words [62] and experiences [61] as well. But not only the content’s affect is important: the affective state of individuals is also related to posterior recall rates [108]. Cognitive load also relates to memory: divided attention (i.e. high cognitive load, with decreased working memory capacity) at encoding time negatively impacts recall scores [18, 21]. The UbiComp community has worked hard the past few years in affective state recognition [40, 41, 55, 92, 113] and cognitive load detection [47, 98, 106, 123] in diverse environments (including educational [37]) and with different objectives (such as HMA [20]). We believe that these works can be applied to students in a University setting with a new objective: human memory augmentation. By detecting relevants moments of a class where students’ physiology is correlated with low posterior recall, an HMA system could extract and create different memory cues (in the form of recorded class material: lecture slides, audiovisual snippets or flash-cards with class concepts) and present them to its users. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. LAUREATE: A Dataset for Supporting Research in Affective Computing and Human Memory Augmentation • 106:7 2.7 The LAUREATE Dataset Our dataset should offer a valuable contribution to the UbiComp community, as it differs in several aspects from the previously detailed works. First, to the best of our knowledge, there are no other publicly available datasets designed for Human Memory Augmentation. We only found two datasets analysing intracranial EEG (iEEG) of epilepsy patients during memory tasks [9, 34]. These datasets cannot be compared with ours, as the data modalities, participants, individuals and dataset purpose are different. Collecting datasets is always a demanding task, especially for in-the-wild settings. Additionally, the long-term capture of physiological signals through wearable devices introduces significant overhead for both experiments and participants. These factors may contribute to the limited availability of similar datasets in this area. Second, all of the 19 datasets in the domains for monitoring emotions, mental stress and cognitive load, and driver state contain only one session per subject (see Table 1, Table 2, and Table 3), meaning that each participant has been recorded only on a single day. On the other hand, our dataset presents a longitudinal study of 42 participants across two courses during a whole university semester (13 weeks). This amount of data is a distinctive feature from other publicly available datasets, as it presents the possibility of analysing inter-subject and intra-subject correlations in the physiological data of the participants. Furthermore, thanks to the self-reports, it is also possible to analyse students’ affective trends and study and lifestyle habits during the semester. Compared to other in-the-wild datasets, mainly the workplace stress datasets (Section 2.4), our dataset benefits from the static essence of students attending lectures. This characteristic reduces the possibility of signal artefacts and noise in the data. In terms of data modalities, our dataset contains similar data to most of the previously listed datasets. Nevertheless, the difference from the primary dataset in the area, StudentLife [120], is the inclusion of students’ physiological data. Finally, different from all the existing datasets, our dataset includes students’ performance on several in-class quizzes (both answers and grades), and timestamped topics in the classes. Including this data is beneficial for studying human memory, making it possible to analyse students’ physiological and mental states during a particular topic and their posterior performance on a related quiz. 3 METHOD 3.1 Participants As the experiment involved the participation of human subjects, ethics delegates at our Faculty examined and authorised the experimental protocol. The experiment was carried out in two different courses at our university. The courses were chosen by convenience sampling [73]. One course was at the Bachelor’s level and the other at the Master’s level, ensuring no participant overlap between the two courses (course_01, course_02). On the first day of classes, the students received a brief presentation about the experiment. The presentation included an explanation of the experiment’s objective and general details about their participation requirements. Specifically, they were asked to wear a wristband during classes, complete daily surveys, and fill out up pre- and post-study surveys. The students who expressed interest in the experiment provided their contact information on a pre-sign-up sheet. Afterwards, we sent these students an email with the informed consent and allowed them several days to review it. We then scheduled small-group video calls with the students to explain the experiment with more detail. During the call, we covered which types of data we would collect (physiological data, self-reported surveys, answers to quizzes, quiz scores, and exam grades), how to properly wear the wristband device, and demonstrated the mobile application used to collect daily self-reports. Students were assured that their data would not be seen by their professors nor used for grading purposes. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. 106:8 • Laporte et al. The next time we met the students (i.e. participants) in the classroom, we asked them to sign the informed consent. The informed consent contained a standalone checkbox asking for the participants’ agreement to anonymously share their data with other investigators for research purposes. After signing the informed consent, researchers provided the participants an anonymous identifier consisting of a letter and a digit. All participants were compensated with a gift card of their choice. The baseline remuneration was CHF 50.for a 10-week commitment to the study (i.e. 20 sessions). The final payment depended on the amount of collected data and could amount to a maximum of CHF 100.3.2 Experimental Apparatus This subsection details the tools used to collect physiological data (Section 3.2.1), the initial survey and daily self-reports (Section 3.2.2), and the final survey (Section 3.2.3). 3.2.1 Physiological Data. The physiological data were recorded using the Empatica E4 wristband2, a medicalgrade wearable device. It comprises several sensors which measure four different physiological signals of the user: electrodermal activity (EDA), blood volume pulse (BVP), acceleration (ACC), and skin temperature (ST). The signals are measured at different sampling rates. The device also derives the inter-beat intervals (IBI) and average heart rate (HR) in a ten-second span from the BVP signal. Details are available in Table 6. Table 6. List of physiological signals recorded by the Empatica E4. Signal Sampling Rate Comments ACC 32 Hz Data in [-2g, 2g] range BVP 64 Hz Data from photoplethysmograph (PPG) EDA 4 Hz Unit in microsiemens (µS) IBI Intermittent Time between two beats with 1/64 second resolution TEMP 4 Hz °C (Celsius) HR 1 Hz Average over the last 10 seconds 3.2.2 Initial Survey and Daily Self-Reports. For the collection of self-reported data, we utilised a service called LifeData. This service consists of a web-based backend accessible to researchers and a mobile application used for data collection (self-reports). Researchers can design and visualise their surveys on a web browser. Once the surveys are finalised and published, participants can download them to their phones as a bundle (known as a lifepak) via the mobile application. The app collects the participants’ answers and synchronises them to LifeData’s backend, making them accessible for researchers to download. It is also possible to configure the administration of the surveys, i.e. how users start a session. Participants can either initiate a session voluntarily or receive a reminder notification to start a new session. We chose the latter option as we were interested in the participants’ self-reports right after their lectures to reduce recall bias [103]. If a participant did not respond to the notification, additional reminders could be sent. We sent an additional notification 40 minutes after the first one and allowed a 12-hour window to start a session from the first notification. Despite this wide availability window for answering the surveys, the average time elapsed on lecture days from notification until a session started was 18 minutes. Therefore, the participants would likely still accurately recall the feelings and impressions elicited by the class they just attended. The initial survey session was started as soon as the lifepak was downloaded to the participant’s phone. The survey comprised several questions about the participants’ lifestyle and study habits. In particular, we asked 2https://www.empatica.com/en-int/research/e4/ Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. LAUREATE: A Dataset for Supporting Research in Affective Computing and Human Memory Augmentation • 106:9 them about their usual breakfast, their preferred sports exercises [17], smoking habits [30], their mother tongue, their English level, their confidence regarding having the skills for the class, their usual studying environment [4], and their expected grade. The questions can be seen in more detail in Appendix B. As the mobile application assigns a unique anonymous ID to identify each installation of the application on a mobile phone, the initial survey also asked the participants to enter the study ID given by the researchers to match them both. The daily survey was scheduled every day at 12:15, when the morning class block ends at our university. This time was chosen to maximise the probability of participants being free to answer the survey. If the day was a lecture day for one of the two courses, then the surveys for those participants were scheduled at the end of that lecture. The daily survey consisted of questions about the participant’s habits in the previous 24 hours. The questions inquired about their physical activity [17, 115], breakfast ingestion, caffeine intake [60, 71, 107], study time [86] and sleep quality [124]. If the survey was after a class, it also included the PANAVA-KS scale and questions about the student’s engagement in class, their level of immersion, and the perceived engagement of the lecturer [93, 94]. The daily survey questions can be seen in more detail in Appendix C. Lecturers also received a survey after class. The survey was shorter than the participants’, with identical engagement and immersion questions, the PANAVA-KS scale, and questions about their level of preparedness and performance. The lecturers’ survey questions can be seen in more detail in Appendix E. PANAVA-KS [97] is a scale used to assess the respondent’s affective states. It is a modified version of the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS) [122] scale, designed for ecological momentarily assessment (EMA). PANAVA-KS consists of a 10-item scale with bipolar adjectives representing high and low activation states of affect. The full scale measures the three dimensions of the affective state: positive activation (PA), negative activation (NA), and valence (VA)3. Our survey included the ten items of PANAVA-KS, which were rated on a 5-point Likert scale with its extremes corresponding to positive and negative states of high and low activation (see Table 7). Table 7. PANAVA-KS [101]. Affective state dimensions. Values range from 1 (Low) 5 (High). Positive Activation (PA) Negative Activation (NA) Valence (V A) Low High Low High Low High Bored Enthusiastic Peaceful Angry Dissatisfied Satisfied Spiritless Motivated Calm Nervous Unhappy Happy Tired Awake Relaxed Stressed Weak Energised Worriless Worried The questions on participants’ engagement, perceived engagement, and immersion were adapted from previous work by Di Lascio et al. [26]. In this case, a 5-point Likert scale was used, with 1 representing not engaged and 5 representing extremely engaged. For technical reasons, a second version of the daily survey had to be implemented after∼20 days from the start of the experiment. We took advantage of this situation to include additional questions (mainly the engagement and immersion questions) and clarify text unclear to participants. 3.2.3 Final Surveys. The final surveys were administered to the participants with the Qualtrics platform4. It was done in two parts, before and after the final exam. The pre-exam final survey included the same questions as the initial survey to evaluate potential habit changes in the participants. Participants were also asked to answer 3KS, which stands for Kurzskala, is the German abbreviation of "Short scale" 4https://qualtrics.com Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. 106:10 • Laporte et al. several questions regarding their relationship with the course material [52], if they felt benefits from studying with teammates [2, 70, 72], and their comfort talking to the professor [93]. These emotional factors in students have been shown in the literature to be related to academic performance. The pre-exam survey also included the big-five questionnaire [13, 48, 110], a widely-used taxonomy of personality traits on five dimensions. While the pre-exam survey asked participants about their perceived understanding of the course’s theoretical topics and their expected final exam grade, the post-exam survey asked them about their actual understanding of the course’s theoretical topics. The reason for reiterating a modified version of the question is to discover if the participants’ perceived knowledge (pre-exam) of the content matched their actual performance (post-exam). The questions can be seen in more detail in Appendix D 3.2.4 Additional Material. Additional material on the dataset includes: • in-class quizzes (participants’ answers and their grades) • exam topics and participants’ grades • class slides • timestamped topics (i.e. in which moments the topics were being taught) • automatically generated class transcripts Audiovisual material (i.e. lecture recordings) may also be available under a more strict sharing agreement. 3.3 Experimental Procedure Fig. 1. Data collection procedure. Each session begins with the device setup. There are three types of sessions depending on their blocks (class, quiz, exam, and break): a) class-only sessions separated by a break, b) class sessions preceded by a quiz, and c) exam sessions. A survey followed all sessions. The data-collection procedure is explained in Figure 1. We asked participants to arrive 10 minutes before the start of each class, to avoid delays and bottlenecks in setting up the devices. As students arrived at the classroom, we asked them for their study ID and noted which device was given to them. Before the start of the session, we equipped the participants with the E4 wristband on their non-dominant hand to minimise signal artefacts caused by movement while writing. As lecturers gesture more with their hands and walk while presenting, they used two devices —one device on each wrist to compensate. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. LAUREATE: A Dataset for Supporting Research in Affective Computing and Human Memory Augmentation • 106:11 (a) (b) Fig. 2. Number of recorded sessions (Figure 2a) and answered surveys (Figure 2b) per participant. Following Empatica’s guidelines, we fitted the E4 above the wrist bone of the non-dominant hand, tight enough without generating discomfort in the user ("snugly above the wrist joint [...] but not so much as to cause discomfort" 5). We verified that the PPG sensor lights were not visible without lifting the housing and asked participants if they felt any discomfort to avoid them manipulating the band. Once the device was secured in the participant’s wrist, we turned it on and waited until its LED turned off, signalling the start of the recording. The recording sessions could be of several types depending on the day’s lecture. Some sessions were class-only, with class blocks separated by breaks. Other sessions started with a quiz, and were then followed by class and/or break blocks. Exam sessions consisted only of an exam block. course_01, additionally, had lab session types, consisting of hands-on sessions where participants interacted with each other while doing coding tasks. After each session, the participants returned the devices and received the survey reminder on their phone (as explained in Section 3.2.2). We turned off the E4 devices and took them to the laboratory. We connected the devices to a single computer to charge them and synchronise them with Empatica’s servers. This also enabled multiple-device synchronisation. 3.4 Duration, Environment and Dataset Size The experiment was held during the Spring Semester of 2022, between February and June (northern hemisphere). Classes were held twice per week for each one of the courses, with no physiological data collected during the Easter break week. Classes ended at the beginning of June and final exams were held in mid-June, the official end of the experiment. Each course had 26 recording sessions. The dataset contains data from 42 student volunteers (7 female, 35 male) and 2 lecturers (1 female, 1 male), i.e. the professor of each course. Participants averaged 𝜇 = 17.29 recording sessions, with a standard deviation of 𝛿 = 6.62. A histogram of the number of recorded sessions per participant is available in Figure 2a. Daily surveys were administered from 2022-03-016 to 2022-06-17 (total = 109 days) for course_01, and from 2022-03-02 to 2022-06-14 (total = 105 days) forcourse_01. The average number of answered surveys per participant 5https://support.empatica.com/hc/en-us/articles/206374015-Wear-your-E4-wristband6Dates are expressed in the international format, i.e. 𝑦𝑦𝑦𝑦 − 𝑚𝑚− 𝑑𝑑 Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. 106:12 • Laporte et al. was 𝜇 = 83.62, with a standard deviation of 𝛿 = 26.09. A histogram of the number of surveys answered per participant is available in Figure 2b. Additional dataset details are available in Table 8. Table 8. Summary of the dataset’s contents. Data Modality Data Amount # participants 42 students (7f/35m), 2 lecturers (1f/1m) # hours of physiological data ∼1400 hours (in 52 sessions) # completed initial surveys 42 # completed daily surveys ∼ 3500 (∼700 on lecture days) # quizzes 13 (6 for course_01, 7 for course_02) # students answering quizzes 196 (105 for course_01, 91 for course_02) # exams 3 (course_01: final exam; course_02: midterm and final exams) # completed final surveys 34 # hours of audiovisual recordings ∼70 hours 3.5 Feature Extraction This subsection details the feature extraction process from the different raw signals. The full list of features can be found in Appendix A. 3.5.1 Blood Volume Pulse. The Empatica device provides BVP data extracted from a PPG (Photoplethysmography) sensor for which they use a proprietary algorithm. The measurement unit is a fraction of nanoWatt ( nW), representing the difference in light absorption observed by a light receiver in the PPG sensor. The frequency is 64 Hz. The BVP data is useful to quantify the dynamics of the heart rate, which in turn provides a limited view of the activation of the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. The sympathetic nervous system is responsible for speeding up certain processes within the body during a physically and/or a mentally demanding task (fight-or-flight response [ 19]). In contrast, after the demanding task, the activation of the sympathetic nervous system slows down, and the parasympathetic nervous system initiates the rest and repair processes. In the context of our study, the sympathetic nervous system stimulation brought on by cognitive strain (e.g. lectures, quizzes or exams) also "stabilises" heart beats, resulting in more regular heartbeat intervals. The heart beat intervals, however, become less regular as a result of rest times in between jobs because "A healthy heart is not a metronome" [105]. The dynamics of the heart beats are frequently quantified using heart rate variability analysis (HRV). HRV analysis has been applied in a various studies for monitoring mental and physiological states, including emotions [127], stress [46], cognitive load [106], engagement [26], and sleep quality [38]. Similarly, our initial analysis of the dataset showed significant differences in the values of an HRV feature (SDNN) depending on the type of session the students were attending [67]. The students had highest SDNN values (most relaxed state) during standard classes. However, as expected, the SDNN values were lower during quiz and exam sessions (which represents increased stress levels). To extract HRV features, we processed the BVP signal using the following steps: (1) Segment the BVP signal on 2-minute segments with a 50% overlap between consecutive windows. The rest of the steps are applied for each 2-minute segment. (2) Use a low-pass Butterworth filter of order three and a cutoff frequency of 5 Hz. (3) Use a moving average filter of 16 samples (0.25 seconds). Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. LAUREATE: A Dataset for Supporting Research in Affective Computing and Human Memory Augmentation • 106:13 Fig. 3. Filtered BVP signal (red lines) and corresponding heartbeats detected automatically (orange dots). (4) To detect the heartbeats, we used a peak detection algorithm based on the first-order difference of the filtered BVP signal [80]. The peak-height threshold was set to 75% of the median of the filtered BVP signal. The minimum distance between two consecutive peaks was set to 50% of the median peak distance for the given window. Example filtered BVP signal and detected heartbeats are depicted in Figure 3 (orange dots). (5) The difference between two consecutive heartbeats represents the peak-to-peak (PP) intervals (also known as RR or NN intervals). We removed the PP intervals that were outside the range [.7 * median-PP, 1.3 * median-PP], where median-PP is the median duration of the PP intervals in the given 2-minute window. From the PP intervals, we extracted 13 HRV features from the time- and frequency-domain. The PP intervals we extracted from the BVP signal correspond to the Inter-Bit-Interval (IBI) data provided by Empatica. However, Empatica provides IBI data only in low-movement periods. Table 9 compares the IBI data provided by Empatica, and the PP data we extracted from the BVP signal. From the table, we can see that less than 1% of the PP data is missing, which is a much lower percentage and thus better than the 36% of missing IBI data. To verify the quality of the PP data, the table also presents the Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient (PCC) and the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) for two features (heart rate and SDNN) extracted from the PP data and from the IBI data. For the heart rate, the PCC is 0.95 (with a 𝑝-value < .001), showing an almost perfect match between the heart rate calculated from the PP data and the heart rate calculated from the IBI data. The MAE is 2.54 Beats Per Minute (BPMs) with a standard deviation of 3.76. For the SDNN, the PCC is 0.67 (with a 𝑝-value < .001), showing a strong correlation between the SDNN calculated from the PP data and the SDNN calculated from the IBI data. The MAE is 0.03 seconds with a standard deviation of 0.02 seconds. These metrics indicate that the quality of the PP data is at least as good as the quality of the Empatica data, especially when we look at averaged features such as the heart rate. The difference between the PP data and the IBI data is larger for the more time-sensitive features, such as the SDNN. Nevertheless, the percentage of missing PP data is much lower than that of missing IBI data. Table 9. Comparison between the Peak-to-Peak (PP) data extracted from the raw BVP data and the IBI data provided by Empatica. The comparison includes the missing data percentage, and PCC and MAE across two features, heart rate (HR) and the standard deviation of the PP intervals (SDNN). Data Source Missing Data HR PCC HR MAE (BPMs) SDNN PCC SDNN MAE (seconds) BVP (ours) 0.1% 0.95 (p<.001) 2.54 (3.76) 0.67 (p<.001) 0.03 (0.02)IBI (Empatica) 36% Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. 106:14 • Laporte et al. Fig. 4. EDA signal (blue line), Tonic component (green line) and Skin Conductance Reponses (SCRs). Each SCR is depicted with three corresponding points: start (green triangles), peak (orange dots), and end (red crosses). 3.5.2 Electrodermal Activity. Electrodermal Activity (EDA, or Galvanic Skin Response —GSR) refers to electrical changes that arise when the skin receives specific signals from the brain. In particular, EDA is described by physiologists as produced purely by the sympathetic nervous system, thus argued to represent a sensitive measure of the activation of the sympathetic nervous system [22, 85]. Consequently, EDA has been used in many studies to measure emotional activation, cognitive workload, physical exertion, etc. [11, 39, 116]. EDA can be measured using small electrodes attached to the skin. For example, the Empatica E4 wrist device measures EDA by flowing a minuscule amount of current between two dry electrodes, through which the device measures the conductivity on the wrist. The data unit is microsiemens (µS), and the frequency is 4 Hz. Besides being a measure of average sweating levels, EDA is also characterised by Skin Conductance Responses (SCRs), which are caused by external stimuli. A typical SCR lasts 1–5 seconds, has a steep onset and an exponential decay or recovery, and reaches an amplitude of at least 0.1 µS [11, 117]. Consequently, SCRs can be used as an additional measure of stimuli presence and stimuli intensity. Figure 4 presents an example EDA signal with the corresponding fast-acting component (SCRs) and slow-acting component (tonic signal). Each SCR is depicted with three corresponding points that are automatically detected: start (green triangles), peak (orange dots), and end (red crosses). We process the EDA signal using the following steps: (1) Use polynomial curve-fitting on the EDA signal to decompose into two components (SCRs and tonic component). (2) Subtract the tonic component from the EDA signal and use the resulting signal as an input to a peak detection algorithm. (3) Detect SCR peaks using the first-order difference of the signal, with a height threshold of 0.1 µS. The minimum distance between two consecutive peaks was set to one second. (4) For each SCR peak, detect surrounding valleys, i.e. the start and end of the SCR. The valleys are detected again using first-order difference. (5) Remove SCRs that have: amplitude-increase duration shorter than one second; or amplitude-decreasing duration shorter than one second. For clarification, the amplitude-increase duration is the timespan between the start of an SCR and the peak of the SCR. Amplitude-decrease duration is the timespan between the peak of the SCR and the end of the SCR. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. LAUREATE: A Dataset for Supporting Research in Affective Computing and Human Memory Augmentation • 106:15 From the decomposed EDA signal, we extracted 41 expert features: 12 features from the raw EDA signal, 19 features related to the SCRs, and 10 features related to periods with significant EDA changes [49]. A significant change was defined as a 5% change in the EDA signal sustained for a period of 15 seconds. 3.5.3 Accelerometers. The Empatica device provides 3-axis accelerometer data represented by Earth’s gravity across each of the three spatial dimensions (x, y, and z). The scale is limited to±2g, and the frequency is 32 Hz. We processed the ACC signal using the following steps: • Calculate the magnitude of the acceleration signal. • Use a moving average filter with 8 samples (0.25 seconds). • Compute the periodogram over the filtered magnitude. • Extract features from the magnitude and from the periodogram. 3.5.4 Skin Temperature. The “fight-or-flight” response restricts blood flow from the extremities and enhances the vital organs. This peripheral vasoconstriction produces changes in the skin temperature of the extremities. As a result, skin temperature on the hands can indicate stress. Moreover, it can reveal the intensity of acute stress [56]. The Empatica device provides peripheral skin temperature data with a frequency of 4 Hz. 3.5.5 Statistical Features. In addition to the expert features, we extracted 22 statistical features from each of the four signals (BVP, EDA, ST, and ACC). The statistical features are 11 statistical descriptors applied to the filtered signals and to the first derivative of the filtered signals. The 11 statistical descriptors are: the first four statistical moments, the mean value of the first and second derivative, the 25th and 75th percentiles, the quartile deviation, the difference between the maximum and minimum values, and the coefficient of variation. 3.5.6 Inter-Subject Correlation. Recent studies have shown that, besides autonomic function (e.g. breathing), heart rate can also be modulated on attentional focus [ 66, 68, 83]. For example, Pérez et al. [ 83] showed a significant inter-subject correlation of heart rate when subjects are presented with an auditory or audiovisual narrative. Given that in our study participants are presented with the same audiovisual narrative, e.g. the lecture, inspecting inter-subject correlation may be a research question of interest. We calculated four Inter-Subject Correlations (ISC) based on the Empatica signals, ISC-EDA, ISC-ACC, ISC-HR and ISC-ST. The ISCs were calculated using the following steps: (1) For each joint session (e.g. a lecture), synchronise the data across the participants. (2) Only for the HR data, upsample the PP (peak-to-peak) signals to a continuous sampling frequency of 4 Hz. The EDA and the ST data are already provided at 4 Hz. The ACC data were downsampled from 32 Hz to 8 Hz. (3) For each signal, calculate ISC by following a similar approach to Pérez et al. [83]: • Segment the data to 1-minute windows. • Perform window-based z-score transformation for each 1-minute window. • Calculate pair-wise Pearson’s correlation (i.e. each participant with each participant) for each 1-minute window. • Using the pair-wise correlations, calculate the average Pearson’s correlation per subject (excluding self-correlation). Note that Pérez et al. [83] also apply the inverse of the fisher-Z transformation to the average PCC to calculate the final ISC scores, but we skipped this step so the final numbers in our dataset represent the average PCC correlations per subject. 4 VALIDATION In this section, we will present validation results from the dataset. We will provide initial statistical analysis (Section 4.1) and preliminary ML experiments (Section 4.2). Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. 106:16 • Laporte et al. Fig. 5. Comparison of the distribution of final exam scores grouped by participants’ self-reported lecture understanding. The mean value of understanding for the whole experiment was calculated for each participant, and then the participants were categorised according to that value into three bins of equal size. 4.1 Statistical Analysis This section covers exploratory data analysis over the dataset. We will (i) analyse self-reported lecture understanding its relationship with final exam scores (Section 4.1.1), and (ii) analyse self-reported physical activity and its relationship with heart-rate features. Additional analyses exploring trends throughout the semester and the relationship between self-reported engagement and electrodermal activity features are available in Appendix F. 4.1.1 Reported Understanding and Final Exam Score. Knowing what one does not know is a crucial skill in learning [16, 69, 126]. If a student is aware of their knowledge gap, they are one step further in the path to remediate it. A possible question to answer with our dataset is if the students are aware of their understanding, or lack thereof, of the concepts taught during the lectures. We analysed the relationship between the students self-reported understanding of the lectures and their final exam score. The results are shown in Figure 5 Figure 5, a boxplot, shows the differences in final exam scores of participants according to their level of understanding of the lectures. Participants answered to the question "How much of today’s session have you understood?" (i.e. lecture_understanding, Appendix C). We then calculated each participant’s meanlecture_understanding score, and then split the participants in three equally-sized groups using quantile-based discretisation with three bins. The image shows a tendency for groups "Low Understanding" and "High Understanding" to differ with respect to their final exam performance. Nevertheless, the results from a Kruskal-Wallis test [64] with post-hoc Dunn’s analysis [32] fail to reject the null hypothesis (with a 𝑝-value = 0.079), probably due to a small sample size in each group. For this comparison we only considered participants that answered to at least 10 post-lecture surveys, leaving us with a sample size of 𝑛 = 36 (i.e. 12 participants per group). When conducting experiments that involve participants’ self-reports, there is always a risk of bias that researchers must consider and try to minimise. In our analysis, we aimed to measure how students’ self-reported understanding of the course contents, a measure subject to bias, matched their actual performance in the course, an objective measure of their comprehension. Even though we did not find statistically significant differences between the groups, the trend suggested that students in both the Low- and High-Understanding groups were able to assess their understanding of the course accurately, as reflected by their grades. This finding lends some validity to the self-reported data. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. LAUREATE: A Dataset for Supporting Research in Affective Computing and Human Memory Augmentation • 106:17 4.1.2 Physical Activity and Heart Rate Features. Our dataset offers the possibility of analysing the impact of students’ self-reported lifestyle habits with their physiological signals. An example of this is the analysis of participants’ self-reported physical activity and their physiological signals, namely their heart rate features. Figure 6 presents this analysis. (a) Comparison of the distribution of average heart rate values grouped by participants’ self-reported physical activity. The mean value of physical activity for the whole experiment was calculated for each participant, and then the participants were categorised according to that value into three bins of equal size. The average heart rate represents each participant’s mean heart rate value over all recording sessions. (b) Comparison of the distribution of mean heart rate variability grouped by participants’ self-reported physical activity. The mean value of physical activity for the whole experiment was calculated for each participant, and then the participants were categorised according to that value into three bins of equal size. The heart rate variability represents each participant’s mean heart rate variability over all recorded sessions. Fig. 6. Comparison of heart rate features (Figure 6a, average heart rate; Figure 6b, heart rate variability —SDNN) between groups of low, medium and high self-reported physical activity Figures 6a and 6b present participants grouped according to their answers to the question "Did you exercise since yesterday’s survey?" (i.e. 10.3, daily_activity, Appendix C). The mean self-reported daily_activity value was calculated for each participant. The participants were then divided into three equal-sized groups with similar physical activity levels using quantile-based discretisation with three bins. Then, the three groups were compared with regard to their mean heart rate (Figure 6a) and mean heart rate variability (Figure 6b) across all lectures. The difference in the groups is statistically significant according to the Kruskal-Wallis test, rejecting the null hypothesis for both mean heart rate (with a 𝑝-value = 0.027) and mean heart rate variability (with a 𝑝-value = 0.015) comparisons. The post-hoc Dunn’s test confirms that the difference is significant in both cases between the groups of low and high levels of physical activity. The figures reproduce the results from previous works in the areas of physical fitness and cardiology: resting heart rate decreases with physical activity [88], while heart rate variability increases in physically active adults when compared to sedentary individuals [24, 31]. As in the previous section, this result adds some credibility to the self-reports from students, but also to the quality of the measured physiological signals. The values of the physiological signals reflect the self-reported fitness levels of the participants. 4.2 Machine Learning This subsection presents baseline ML models we developed for: Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. 106:18 • Laporte et al. • user- and device-identification using physiological and acceleration data. These would be useful for unsupervised user adaptation, but also as baseline models for evaluating user privacy. In these experiments, one instance represents a 2-minute data window, i.e. the models try to identify the user every two minutes. We experimented with classical ML models (trained using the features extracted from 2-minute data windows), and with Deep Learning (DL) models (trained using the raw data from the same 2-minute data windows). • classes vs. breaks recognition using physiological and acceleration data. Similar to the user-identification models, also in these experiments one instance represents a 2-minute data window, i.e. the models try to detect whether the users are at class or are having a break every two minutes. We experimented with classical ML models, and with DL models. • estimating self-reported affect and mood states (understanding, satisfaction, energy, stress, tiredness, peacefulness, motivation, calmness, enthusiasm, and worriedness) using physiological data and behaviour self-reports (e.g. sleep quality and study hours prior to a specific recording session). Different than the other type of models, in these experiments one instance represents one session (e.g. one class). That is because the self-reported data (labels) corresponds to the overall session. Because of the per-session labelled data, the number of instances was 671, which may not be enough for an end-to-end learning approach. The classical models were trained using Random Forest (RF) and Light Gradient Boosting Machine (LGBM), algorithms that require minimal parameter tuning and produce models that are less sensitive to noise because of their ensemble-based approach. Although ensemble approaches are considered classical, they are still relevant in the ML community, producing state-of-the-art results in human activity recognition, for example [119]. As an end-to-end DL approach, we used Spectro-Temporal Residual Network (STResNet). STResNet is an architecture for end-to-end learning specialised for multimodal sensor data. More specifically, STResNet can learn from several sensors simultaneously, each of them having a different sampling frequency, and it learns both in the time domain and in the frequency domain. The frequency information is extracted by calculating the spectrogram in decibels for each sensor channel; the temporal representation is extracted by residual blocks that contain CNN layers with 1-dimensional filters. The final output is provided by a softmax layer, which represents a class probability. STResNet was introduced for activity recognition based on smartphones [43], but later on, it has been used for a variety of domains including physiological sensors [109], and sound [42]. Our goal in these experiments was to provide baseline results for future research. We did not perform extensive hyperparameter tuning, feature selection, nor data normalisation steps. The features and the code for training the models will be made available online with the dataset. 4.2.1 User Identification and Device Identification Using Wrist-Device Data. User identification is a task that has been explored from several perspectives, including unsupervised personalisation, user privacy, and access control (security). For example, user identification based on wearables could replace the conventional password, enabling automatic personalisation of services and access control of confidential information. Example approaches based on sensor data include user identification using IMU data while performing daily activities [33], user identification using leakage current measured during laptop usage [29], and user identification using RFID data [58]. Our dataset is unique in regard to the domain of user identification, containing dozen 1.5 h sessions per participant scattered through four months period. Furthermore, the participants were assigned a random Empatica device for each session (one out of thirty-one devices), thus decoupling device-specific bias in the data from the user IDs. The classical ML models were trained using the features extracted from 2-minute data windows, and the DL models were trained using the raw data from the same data windows. Based on the input sensor data, the models learn to detect the user that wears the device, i.e. the user that provides the input data. The number of windows (instances) per participant and per device after the segmentation are presented in Figure 7a and Figure 7b. For Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. LAUREATE: A Dataset for Supporting Research in Affective Computing and Human Memory Augmentation • 106:19 (a) (b) Fig. 7. Number of instances per participant (Figure 7a) and device (Figure 7b) after sliding-window segmentation example, participant B7 has 2817 2-minute instances, which amounts to 1408 unique minutes because of the 50% overlap between consecutive windows (or 23 hours and 28 minutes of data). The average number of instances per participant was 1741. The average number of instances per device was 2359. Figure 7a presents a skewed distribution due to some participants dropping out from the experiment, and sometimes even the course, soon after starting the semester. Attrition is a normal occurrence in universities, and one of the challenges in data collection. Figure 7b also presents a skewed distribution, but due to different reasons. Device A01642 (first from the right) stopped working after the first recording session, so it was not used anymore. The reason why the following six devices from the right also have a lower number of data instances is because they were used for a parallel experiment. Due to the early drop in participants, there was a surplus of devices for our data collection. Older devices (i.e. with smaller IDs in lexicographic order) were given to the other experiment. We evaluated the models using 5-fold cross-validation (without data shuffling), where all the data collected in one day belongs only in one of the folds, and consequently, it belongs either only in training or in test subsets. This evaluation approach avoids temporal overlap between the train and the test subsets. In a real-life use case, this would mean that the models have access to labelled sensor data from previous days (sessions), i.e. the models have labels about which sessions and consequently which 2-minute windows belong to which user. Based on the training data, the models try to identify (detect) the user to which the 2-minute windows (from the test set) belong. The results of these experiments are shown in Table 10. For the user-identification task, all of the ML models outperformed the majority classifier by a large margin. The highest performance of 56.3% accuracy and .49 F1-score was achieved by the STResNet model. These results indicate that users can be identified to some extent from the physiological data using ML and that end-to-end learning may be a more appropriate approach for the task. For the device-identification task, the results show that the ML models did not outperform the majority classifier by a large margin, which indicates that there is no substantial device-specific bias in the data. 4.2.2 Class vs. Breaks Recognition Using Wrist-Device Data. Class and breaks recognition from the Empatica data could be considered as a use-case for Human Activity Recognition (HAR) methods – a well-established research field that develops methods for recognising the gestures and motions a user performs. Recognising when the students are taking a class or on a break could lead to contextualised interventions like blocking distractions during work activities or suggesting the students take a break during long studying sessions. For example, Di Lascio et al. [25] proposed a multimodal approach – that includes Empatica data, laptop usage, and phone usage data – to automatically recognise the breaks and work activities of knowledge workers. In a study involving 14 participants, the ML model proposed by the researchers achieved an average F1-score of .82. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. 106:20 • Laporte et al. Table 10. Performance measures for user-identification and device-identification ML models. The models were evaluated using 5-fold cross-validation (without temporal shuffling). User Identification Device IdentificationModel Acc. (%) F1-score Acc. (%) F1-score Majority 3.8 N/A 4.9 N/A RF 40.1 .34 8.9 .08 LGBM 27.3 .23 9.5 .09 STResNet 56.3 .49 9.1 .08 Similar to the user-identification experiments, the classical ML models were trained using the features extracted from each 2-minute window, and the DL models were trained using the raw data from the same windows. We evaluated the models using 5-fold cross-validation (without temporal shuffling), where all the data collected in one day belongs only in one of the folds, thus avoiding temporal overlap between the train and the test subsets. The results of these experiments are shown in Table 11. The table reports evaluation scores, for per-instance predictions and for voting predictions. Instance predictions treat each user as independent from the group, i.e. the evaluation scores are calculated over all the instances from the sliding-window segmentation. Grouped prediction utilises the information that several users are attending the same class, and thus the same break segment could be recognised using the data from different users. For example, if there are 15 students attending the same class, there will be 15 predictions for each 2-minute segment (instance). We grouped those 15 predictions using threshold-based voting: predict break if a break was recognised in 20% of the predictions (e.g. 3 out of 15). We chose 20% instead of 50% (which would be a majority vote), because we wanted to prioritise the “break” class, given that the class distribution was skewed towards the “no-break” class – 88% of the instance had a label “no break”. If we look at the evaluation scores before the voting (instance predictions in Table 11), we can see that all of the ML models performed similarly, with STResNet and LGBM having a slightly higher F1-score than RF. It can also be seen that the F1-scores are lower than the accuracy scores – a consequence of the class imbalance. The voting-based predictions brought significant improvements compared to the instance-based predictions, with the highest F1-score of .9 achieved by the STResNet model which is much higher than the F1-score of .72 achieved by the same model for the instance-based predictions. Table 11. Performance measures for breaks-detection ML models. The models were evaluated using 5-fold cross-validation (without temporal shuffling). Breaks detection (instance predictions) Breaks detection (voting predictions)Model Acc. (%) F1-score Acc. (%) F1-score Majority 88.2 N/A 88.2 N/A RF 90.5 .68 94.9 .85 LGBM 90.8 .71 95.6 .88 STResNet 90.0 .72 95.6 .90 4.2.3 Affect and Mood Recognition Using Behaviour Data and Wrist-Device Data. Affective computing is an interdisciplinary field that develops systems that recognise, interpret, and simulate human affect [ 84, 114]. A fundamental assumption is that different mental states (e.g. emotions and stress), and different intensities of those states, manifest through physiological and behavioural changes. A variety of wearables can capture these changes, including those available in the Empatica device. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. LAUREATE: A Dataset for Supporting Research in Affective Computing and Human Memory Augmentation • 106:21 The affect and mood variables that we model in these experiments are the reported levels of: understanding, satisfaction, energy, stress, tiredness, peacefulness, motivation, calmness, enthusiasm, and worriedness. In addition to these low-level variables, we also calculated levels of: • Positive Activation: average value calculated over the levels of enthusiasm, motivation, wakefulness, and energy. • Negative Activation: average value calculated over the levels of anger, nervousness, stress, and worriedness. • Valence: average value calculated over the levels of satisfaction and happiness. Different than our previous ML experiments where the models used as input 2-minute data windows, in these experiments one input instance represents one session (e.g. a 2-hour class). That is because the self-reported data (labels) corresponds to the overall sessions. To avoid having bigger number of features than the number of training instances (which could cause an overfitting problem), we selected only a few representative features from each Empatica signal. These features were: mean skin temperature, mean EDA, number of SCR peaks, EDA sum of positive derivative, EDA average peak amplitude, top three frequencies of the accelerometer’s magnitude, and the ten HRV features from the BVP data. As an additional step, we performed session-based aggregation over these features. The aggregation is needed because the eighteen features were calculated using a sliding window of two minutes with 50% overlap, but the questionaries data only corresponds to one full session (two classes with a break in between, which amounts to an overall duration of 2 hours). We used six aggregation functions: median, standard deviation, sum, 5th quantile, 95th quantile, and quantile difference (Q95 – Q5). After the aggregation, we had 671 instances with 108 Empatica-based features (18 main features x 6 aggregation functions) and five questionnaire-based behaviour features. In addition to the Empatica features, we also used five questionnaire-based behaviour features, including:study hours, daily activity, daily breakfast, daily caffeine intake, and daily sleep quality. These features represent the participant’s behaviour in the 24 hours prior to the recording session. We used regression models in these experiments, given that each of the target affect and mood variables are on a Likert scale between 1 and 5. We investigated two types of regression models, models that use only questionnaire-based behaviour features (RF with B input and LGBM with B input models in Table 12), and models that use both behaviour features and Empatica features (RF with B+E input and LGBM with B+E input models in Table 12). For the best-performing models, we also explored feature normalisation, i.e. we performed personspecific standardisation for the Empatica features to decrease the inter-subject variability of the physiological data (RF with B+EN input and LGBM with B+EN input models in Table 12). We evaluated the models using 5-fold cross-validation (without temporal shuffling), where all the data collected in one day belongs only in one of the folds. The regression models were retrained for each affect/mood label. The Dummy model in Table 12 outputs the mean value per label. From the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) values in Table 12, we can see that the models that use only the behaviour features (RF/B Input and LGBM/B input) performed worse than the Dummy regressor for all of the thirteen labels. On the other hand, the models that used the combination of behaviour features and Empatica features (RF/BE and LGBM/BE models) slightly outperformed the Dummy regressor. The best results are achieved using the combination of behaviour features and normalised Empatica features (B + EN). For example, for the label valence (VA in Table 12), RF and LGBM achieved MAE of 0.73, which is a slight improvement compared to the MAE of 0.80 calculated for the Dummy regressor. These results indicate that the physiological data contains some information related to the participants’ affective states. Nevertheless, modelling affect is a complex task that requires more advanced approaches. We also explored person-independent models evaluated using Leave-One-Subject-out (LOSO) cross-validation. The results of these experiments are included in Appendix F.3. None of the models performed better than the Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. 106:22 • Laporte et al. Table 12. Mean Absolute Error for affect and mood regression models using questionnaire-based behaviour data only ( B), or behaviour data and Empatica data (B+E), or behaviour data with Normalised (Standardised Features) Empatica data (B+EN), or Baseline -no features- (Base (n.f.)). Each label is in the range [1, 5]. The dummy regressor outputs the mean value per label. The models were evaluated using Person-dependent 5-fold cross-validation (without temporal shuffling). Columns represent the labels as follows: understanding, satisfaction, energy, stress, tiredness, peacefulness, motivation, calmness, enthusiasm, worriedness, Positive Affect, Negative Affect and VAlence. N Model Input type und sat en str tir pea mot cal ent wor PA NA V A RF B 0.92 0.92 0.88 0.96 0.94 0.83 0.87 0.81 0.87 0.94 0.63 0.70 0.83 LGBM B 0.87 0.89 0.86 0.93 0.90 0.77 0.84 0.78 0.84 0.92 0.60 0.66 0.79 No RF B+E 0.84 0.87 0.85 0.88 0.88 0.75 0.84 0.77 0.82 0.86 0.59 0.62 0.78 LGBM B+E 0.86 0.88 0.85 0.89 0.90 0.75 0.84 0.79 0.82 0.88 0.60 0.63 0.78 RF B+EN 0.79 0.82 0.87 0.85 0.92 0.70 0.84 0.77 0.79 0.83 0.59 0.55 0.73 S.F. LGBM B+EN 0.79 0.83 0.91 0.84 0.91 0.69 0.83 0.76 0.80 0.82 0.59 0.55 0.73 Dummy Base (n.f.) 0.89 0.89 0.88 0.96 0.98 0.77 0.89 0.81 0.82 0.95 0.62 0.67 0.80 baselines, confirming the complexity of the task (modelling affective states), and the need for more advanced, personalised ML approaches. 5 DISCUSSION In this section, we will (i) discuss the limitations of our work, (ii) explain our intended use of the dataset for human memory augmentation, and (iii) conclude the discussion with a brief summary of the dataset and potential applications of relevance to the UbiComp community. 5.1 Limitations 5.1.1 Lack of Continuous Physiological Data. One of the main limitations of our dataset is the limited amount of physiological data. As we only collected participants’ signals during classes, the data is not continuous and does not provide a complete understanding of users’ routine behaviour context. Several reasons motivated this decision. First, collecting physiological data outside the classroom would have required participants to use the device all day, increasing their experiment workload and the possibility of user error during device charging and data synchronisation. Maintaining a balance between the participant’s perceived cost of the experiment and its reward is important to decrease dropout rates [28]. Second, our experimental design necessitated randomly assigning a device to participants for each class to enable user identification without device-specific bias. If participants had kept their devices for longer periods, the logistics of randomising the device would increase in difficulty, as participants would need to charge and synchronise the devices every day before meeting with us to sort them again. Third, we prioritised data diversity over quantity, as we had more participants (42) than available devices (31). Lastly, our primary interest was collecting in-class physiological signals for analysing students’ attention and arousal levels due to their relationship with memory. We could not compromise on having less in-class data due to errors arising from extended out-of-class data collection. Future work should aim to conduct a more extensive data collection that includes students’ physiological signals outside class, along with additional affective self-reports throughout the day. Such an experimental design, Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. LAUREATE: A Dataset for Supporting Research in Affective Computing and Human Memory Augmentation • 106:23 compared to our dataset, would obtain a more comprehensive understanding of participants’ contextual mood and behaviour. 5.1.2 Reliability of Self-Reports. Our dataset relies mostly on self-reports, which can be subject to different types of bias, such as self-report bias, recall bias, social desirability bias, and bias errors resulting from the wrong interpretation of questions. Self-report bias is perhaps the most difficult to address, as it is impossible to know how accurately students can assess their feelings, moods, behaviours and thoughts. As described in the Validation (4) and some of our prior work [36, 67], we assess the validity of the self-reports by including objective data such as grades and physiological signals in our analysis. To minimise recall bias, we sent survey reminder notifications right after each class ended. Our analysis shows that students answered surveys, on average, within 18 minutes of receiving the notification. We believe this time frame is short enough to avoid this type of bias. We took several steps to avoidsocial desirability bias, i.e. the possibility of students trying to answer self-reports in a way that would please the researchers or to appear more socially desirable. First, we informed students that their self-reports would not affect their grades, and that their data would only be analysed after grading. Lastly, none of the two researchers involved in data collection was involved in grading quizzes or final exams for the two courses in question. To address the potential wrong interpretation of questions , we randomly asked participants if they had any concerns about the content of the surveys during the first days of data collection. Only few students had doubts (although never about the same question), so we (i) provided them with prompt clarifications and (ii) immediately disambiguated the corresponding question in the subsequent versions of the survey. 5.2 Human Memory Augmentation Applications While so far we focused mainly on the use of our dataset in the area of affective computing, we believe that it also has the potential to facilitate other applications, particularly in the field of Human Memory Augmentation. The richness of the dataset provides a unique research opportunity. Compared to other datasets in similar areas, ours contains students’ physiological signals while attending classes, their performance across multiple examinations, and features class content in different modalities (video, audio and slides) with timestamped events (e.g. breaks) and topic descriptors as metadata. As described in Section 2.6 in the Related Work, the analysis of physiological signals can be used to recognise students’ affect and attention levels throughout classes. By adding timestamped topics to the analysis (i.e. when a particular topic was being taught during a class), we could also identify the students’ attention levels during specific topics. Furthermore, as both courses in the dataset had recurrent quizzes (at least as often as every two weeks), we can also examine the students performance on a per-topic basis. This analysis may help us predict the topics a student may be struggling with. Moreover, the multimodality of captured and available class content is also beneficial for research in the Human Memory Augmentation area. Since human memory is cue-driven, and cues can be of different types (with their efficacy also depending on its type), the class content could be used to create different sets of cues (e.g. flashcards) that the students could review based on their learning style preferences. A spaced repetition approach could be used to present these cues to the students and improve their learning. The most interesting aspect of this research is that this whole process could be partially automated by an HMA system, relieving the user of some of the workload and assisting them with memory recall. Lectures are recorded by many universities worldwide and made available to students. Physiological signals can be automatically filtered, processed and analysed, and cues could be automatically generated and presented to the user at relevant times (e.g. by monitoring their cognitive load to optimise their receptivity to study prompts [20]). The user would Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. 106:24 • Laporte et al. only need to take care of the device (i.e. charging and synchronising) and review the content at the appropriate time for learning. 5.3 Conclusion In this work, we presented a dataset we collected during a 13-week study in a university setting. The dataset comprises raw physiological data (namely, ACC, EDA, TEMP, BVP) and expert features (Section 3.5, Appendix A) from 42 student participants and 2 lecturers during 26 recording sessions (i.e. lectures) along with daily surveys covering the participants’ habits (such as study, physical activity, sleep quality, caffeine and breakfast intakes). The dataset also includes students’ performance in the different course examinations (i.e. quizzes, assignments and exams) and timestamped class topics. Our dataset differs from similar work in the area in several aspects. First, multiple datasets in the affective computing domain only contain one session per subject, limiting the analysis of inter-subject and intra-subject correlations. Paired with the daily self-reports, this longitudinal study also enables the analysis of trends and habits throughout the semester, as well as the collective affective status of the students during class. Second, some of the other datasets were collected in laboratory or uncontrolled settings, increasing the number of artefacts in the data. Our dataset benefits from being an in-the-wild experiment in a relatively controlled environment (structured classes in a University setting), minimising the risk of spurious data. Third, compared to the most important work in a similar university setting, StudentLife [120], our dataset contains the participants’ physiological signals attending to one of their courses, which expands the dataset’s possibilities. Regardless of our primary research motivation to use this dataset for exploring HMA systems, we believe that DATASET offers a significant contribution to the UbiComp community, including but not limited to affective computing tasks. We covered some of the possibilities that this dataset offers in Section 4 - Validation, using statistical analysis and ML models. We still envision much more other applications for it, such as: • comparing physiological signals of – caffeine drinkers vs. not drinkers – breakfast eaters (small? big?) vs. no breakfast – physically active vs. sedentary – top-performers vs. low-performers – good sleep quality vs bad sleep quality (either in aggregated form or within-subjects) • user identification from physiological signals • device identification from device-specific bias • activity detection (in-class vs breaks) • affect prediction/modelling from physiological signals and self-reports • engagement detection from self-reports (e.g. effects of sleep, nutrition, physical activity on class sentiment) • learning performance prediction • modelling behaviour (exercise level, sleep quality, food and caffeine intake) The dataset is available to researchers after the signature of a sharing agreement (see Section 6 - Dataset and Code Availability). 6 DATASET AND CODE AVAILABILITY The dataset is available to researchers after the signing of a sharing agreement. Please contact the first author for more information. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. LAUREATE: A Dataset for Supporting Research in Affective Computing and Human Memory Augmentation • 106:25 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS As this work involved the participation of human subjects, approval of all ethical and experimental procedures and protocols was granted by the ethics committee at the Faculty of Informatics, Università della Svizzera italiana. The experimenters would like to thank all of the participants that were part of the experiment. We would also like to thank Ms. Enqi Fu for her valuable help planning and during the experiment. Authors of the paper would like to thank the reviewers for their valuable feedback to improve the paper. REFERENCES [1] Mojtaba Khomami Abadi, Ramanathan Subramanian, Seyed Mostafa Kia, Paolo Avesani, Ioannis Patras, and Nicu Sebe. 2015. DECAF: MEG-Based Multimodal Database for Decoding Affective Physiological Responses. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing 6, 3 (July 2015), 209–222. https://doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2015.2392932 [2] Sulaiman Ainin, M. Muzamil Naqshbandi, Sedigheh Moghavvemi, and Noor Ismawati Jaafar. 2015. Facebook Usage, Socialization and Academic Performance. Computers & Education 83 (April 2015), 64–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2014.12.018 [3] Rasha M. Al-Eidan, Hend Al-Khalifa, and Abdul Malik Al-Salman. 2018. A Review of Wrist-Worn Wearable: Sensors, Models, and Challenges. Journal of Sensors 2018 (Dec. 2018), 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/5853917 [4] George J. Allen, Wayne M. Lerner, and James J. Hinrichsen. 1972. Study Behaviors and Their Relationships to Test Anxiety and Academic Performance. Psychological Reports 30, 2 (April 1972), 407–410. https://doi.org/10.2466/pr0.1972.30.2.407 [5] Constantino Álvarez Casado, Petteri Paananen, Pekka Siirtola, Susanna Pirttikangas, and Miguel Bordallo López. 2021. Meditation Detection Using Sensors from Wearable Devices. InAdjunct Proceedings of the 2021 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and Proceedings of the 2021 ACM International Symposium on Wearable Computers (UbiComp ’21) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 112–116. https://doi.org/10.1145/3460418.3479318 [6] Jorn Bakker, Mykola Pechenizkiy, and Natalia Sidorova. 2011. What’s Your Current Stress Level? Detection of Stress Patterns from GSR Sensor Data. In 2011 IEEE 11th International Conference on Data Mining Workshops . IEEE, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 573–580. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDMW.2011.178 [7] Sanjay Bilakhia, Stavros Petridis, Anton Nijholt, and Maja Pantic. 2015. The MAHNOB Mimicry Database: A Database of Naturalistic Human Interactions. Pattern Recognition Letters 66 (Nov. 2015), 52–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2015.03.005 [8] Javad Birjandtalab, Diana Cogan, Maziyar Baran Pouyan, and Mehrdad Nourani. 2016. A Non-EEG Biosignals Dataset for Assessment and Visualization of Neurological Status. In 2016 IEEE International Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS) . IEEE, Dallas, Texas, USA, 110–114. https://doi.org/10.1109/SiPS.2016.27 [9] Ece Boran, Tommaso Fedele, Adrian Steiner, Peter Hilfiker, Lennart Stieglitz, Thomas Grunwald, and Johannes Sarnthein. 2020. Dataset of Human Medial Temporal Lobe Neurons, Scalp and Intracranial EEG during a Verbal Working Memory Task. Scientific Data 7, 1 (Jan. 2020), 30. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-0364-3 [10] Margaret M. Bradley, Mark K. Greenwald, Margaret C. Petry, and Peter J. Lang. 1992. Remembering Pictures: Pleasure and Arousal in Memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 18, 2 (1992), 379–390. https://doi.org/10.1037/02787393.18.2.379 [11] Margaret M. Bradley and Peter J. Lang. 2000. Affective Reactions to Acoustic Stimuli. Psychophysiology 37, 2 (March 2000), 204–215. https://doi.org/10.1111/1469-8986.3720204 [12] Watson Braithwaite and Rowe Jones. 2015. A-Brief-Guide-for-Analysing-Electrodermal-Activity. Technical Report. Technical Report: Selective Attention & Awareness Laboratory (SAAL . . . . [13] Vittorio V Busato, Frans J Prins, Jan J Elshout, and Christiaan Hamaker. 1998. The Relation between Learning Styles, the Big Five Personality Traits and Achievement Motivation in Higher Education. Personality and Individual Differences 26, 1 (Jan. 1998), 129–140. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0191-8869(98)00112-3 [14] Larry Cahill and James L. McGaugh. 1995. A Novel Demonstration of Enhanced Memory Associated with Emotional Arousal. Consciousness and Cognition 4, 4 (1995), 410–421. https://doi.org/10.1006/ccog.1995.1048 [15] Ryan Cain and Victor R. Lee. 2016. Measuring Electrodermal Activity to Capture Engagement in an Afterschool Maker Program. In Proceedings of the 6th Annual Conference on Creativity and Fabrication in Education (FabLearn ’16) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 78–81. https://doi.org/10.1145/3003397.3003409 [16] Imelda S. Caleon and R. Subramaniam. 2010. Do Students Know What They Know and What They Don’t Know? Using a Four-Tier Diagnostic Test to Assess the Nature of Students’ Alternative Conceptions. Research in Science Education 40, 3 (May 2010), 313–337. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11165-009-9122-4 [17] JESSE CALESTINE, MELISSA BOPP, CHRISTOPHER M. BOPP, and ZACK PAPALIA. 2017. College Student Work Habits Are Related to Physical Activity and Fitness. International Journal of Exercise Science 10, 7 (Nov. 2017), 1009–1017. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. 106:26 • Laporte et al. [18] Valérie Camos and Sophie Portrat. 2015. The Impact of Cognitive Load on Delayed Recall. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 22, 4 (Aug. 2015), 1029–1034. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-014-0772-5 [19] W.B. Cannon. 1939. The Wisdom of the Body, 2nd Ed . Norton & Co., Oxford, England. [20] Samantha W. T. Chan, Shardul Sapkota, Rebecca Mathews, Haimo Zhang, and Suranga Nanayakkara. 2020. Prompto: Investigating Receptivity to Prompts Based on Cognitive Load from Memory Training Conversational Agent. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 4, 4 (Dec. 2020), 1–23. https://doi.org/10.1145/3432190 [21] Fergus I. M. Craik, Richard Govoni, Moshe Naveh-Benjamin, and Nicole D. Anderson. 1996. The Effects of Divided Attention on Encoding and Retrieval Processes in Human Memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 125, 2 (1996), 159–180. https: //doi.org/10.1037/0096-3445.125.2.159 [22] Hugo D. Critchley. 2002. Review: Electrodermal Responses: What Happens in the Brain. The Neuroscientist 8, 2 (April 2002), 132–142. https://doi.org/10.1177/107385840200800209 [23] Valeria De Angel, Serena Lewis, Katie White, Carolin Oetzmann, Daniel Leightley, Emanuela Oprea, Grace Lavelle, Faith Matcham, Alice Pace, David C. Mohr, Richard Dobson, and Matthew Hotopf. 2022. Digital Health Tools for the Passive Monitoring of Depression: A Systematic Review of Methods. npj Digital Medicine 5, 1 (Jan. 2022), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-021-00548-8 [24] Ronald Edmond De Meersman. 1993. Heart Rate Variability and Aerobic Fitness. American Heart Journal 125, 3 (March 1993), 726–731. https://doi.org/10.1016/0002-8703(93)90164-5 [25] Elena Di Lascio, Shkurta Gashi, Juan Sebastian Hidalgo, Beatrice Nale, Maike E. Debus, and Silvia Santini. 2020. A Multi-Sensor Approach to Automatically Recognize Breaks and Work Activities of Knowledge Workers in Academia.Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 4, 3 (Sept. 2020), 78:1–78:20. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411821 [26] Elena Di Lascio, Shkurta Gashi, and Silvia Santini. 2018. Unobtrusive Assessment of Students’ Emotional Engagement during Lectures Using Electrodermal Activity Sensors. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 2, 3 (Sept. 2018), 103:1–103:21. https://doi.org/10.1145/3264913 [27] Elena Di Lascio, Shkurta Gashi, and Silvia Santini. 2019. Laughter Recognition Using Non-invasive Wearable Devices. In Proceedings of the 13th EAI International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth’19) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 262–271. https://doi.org/10.1145/3329189.3329216 [28] Don A. Dillman, Jolene D. Smyth, and Leah Melani Christian. 2014. Internet, Phone, Mail, and Mixed-Mode Surveys: The Tailored Design Method (4th edition ed.). Wiley, Hoboken. [29] Dian Ding, Lanqing Yang, Yi-Chao Chen, and Guangtao Xue. 2021. Leakage or Identification: Behavior-irrelevant User Identification Leveraging Leakage Current on Laptops. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 5, 4 (Dec. 2021), 1–23. https://doi.org/10.1145/3494984 [30] Wayne M Dinn, Ayse Aycicegi, and Catherine L Harris. 2004. Cigarette Smoking in a Student Sample: Neurocognitive and Clinical Correlates. Addictive Behaviors 29, 1 (Jan. 2004), 107–126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addbeh.2003.07.001 [31] Jin-Guo Dong. 2016. The Role of Heart Rate Variability in Sports Physiology (Review). Experimental and Therapeutic Medicine 11, 5 (May 2016), 1531–1536. https://doi.org/10.3892/etm.2016.3104 [32] Olive Jean Dunn. 1961. Multiple Comparisons among Means. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 56, 293 (March 1961), 52–64. https://doi.org/10. 1080/01621459.1961.10482090 [33] Seham Abd Elkader, Michael Barlow, and Erandi Lakshika. 2018. Wearable Sensors for Recognizing Individuals Undertaking Daily Activities. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM International Symposium on Wearable Computers . ACM, Singapore Singapore, 64–67. https://doi.org/10.1145/3267242.3267245 [34] Mailys C. M. Faraut, April A. Carlson, Shannon Sullivan, Oana Tudusciuc, Ian Ross, Chrystal M. Reed, Jeffrey M. Chung, Adam N. Mamelak, and Ueli Rutishauser. 2018. Dataset of Human Medial Temporal Lobe Single Neuron Activity during Declarative Memory Encoding and Recognition. Scientific Data 5, 1 (Feb. 2018), 180010. https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2018.10 [35] H. Perry Fordson, Katherine Gardhouse, Nicholas Cicero, Junichi Chikazoe, Adam Anderson, and Eve Derosa. 2022. A Novel Deep Learning Based Emotion Recognition Approach to Well Being from Fingertip Blood Volume Pulse. In 2022 International Conference on Machine Learning and Cybernetics (ICMLC) . IEEE, Toyama, Japan, 130–137. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICMLC56445.2022.9941301 [36] Enqi Fu, Matias Laporte, Cindy Guerrero Toro, Martin Gjoreski, and Marc Langheinrich. 2023. Affect and Learning in the LAUREATE Dataset. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 2022 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and the 2022 ACM International Symposium on Wearable Computers (UbiComp/ISWC ’22 Adjunct) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 168–172. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544793.3563401 [37] Nan Gao, Wei Shao, Mohammad Saiedur Rahaman, and Flora D. Salim. 2020. N-Gage: Predicting in-Class Emotional, Behavioural and Cognitive Engagement in the Wild. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 4, 3 (Sept. 2020), 79:1–79:26. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411813 arXiv:2007.04831 [38] Shkurta Gashi, Lidia Alecci, Elena Di Lascio, Maike E. Debus, Francesca Gasparini, and Silvia Santini. 2022. The Role of Model Personalization for Sleep Stage and Sleep Quality Recognition Using Wearables. IEEE Pervasive Computing 21, 2 (2022), 1–9. https: //doi.org/10.1109/MPRV.2022.3164334 Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. LAUREATE: A Dataset for Supporting Research in Affective Computing and Human Memory Augmentation • 106:27 [39] Shkurta Gashi, Elena Di Lascio, Bianca Stancu, Vedant Das Swain, Varun Mishra, Martin Gjoreski, and Silvia Santini. 2020. Detection of Artifacts in Ambulatory Electrodermal Activity Data. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 4, 2 (June 2020), 44:1–44:31. https://doi.org/10.1145/3397316 [40] Hristijan Gjoreski, Ifigeneia I. Mavridou, Mohsen Fatoorechi, Ivana Kiprijanovska, Martin Gjoreski, Graeme Cox, and Charles Nduka. 2021. emteqPRO: Face-mounted Mask for Emotion Recognition and Affective Computing. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 2021 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and Proceedings of the 2021 ACM International Symposium on Wearable Computers (UbiComp ’21) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 23–25. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 3460418.3479276 [41] Martin Gjoreski, Hristijan Gjoreski, Mitja Luštrek, and Matjaž Gams. 2016. Continuous Stress Detection Using a Wrist Device: In Laboratory and Real Life. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing Adjunct - UbiComp ’16. ACM Press, Heidelberg, Germany, 1185–1193. https://doi.org/10.1145/2968219.2968306 [42] Martin Gjoreski, Anton Gradisek, Borut Budna, Matjaz Gams, and Gregor Poglajen. 2020. Machine Learning and End-to-End Deep Learning for the Detection of Chronic Heart Failure From Heart Sounds. IEEE Access 8 (2020), 20313–20324. https://doi.org/10.1109/ ACCESS.2020.2968900 [43] Martin Gjoreski, Vito Janko, Gašper Slapničar, Miha Mlakar, Nina Reščič, Jani Bizjak, Vid Drobnič, Matej Marinko, Nejc Mlakar, Mitja Luštrek, and Matjaž Gams. 2020. Classical and Deep Learning Methods for Recognizing Human Activities and Modes of Transportation with Smartphone Sensors. Information Fusion 62 (Oct. 2020), 47–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2020.04.004 [44] Martin Gjoreski, Ivana Kiprijanovska, Simon Stankoski, Ifigeneia Mavridou, M. John Broulidakis, Hristijan Gjoreski, and Charles Nduka. 2022. Facial EMG Sensing for Monitoring Affect Using a Wearable Device. Scientific Reports 12, 1 (Oct. 2022), 16876. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-21456-1 [45] Martin Gjoreski, Tine Kolenik, Timotej Knez, Mitja Luštrek, Matjaž Gams, Hristijan Gjoreski, and Veljko Pejović. 2020. Datasets for Cognitive Load Inference Using Wearable Sensors and Psychological Traits. Applied Sciences 10, 11 (May 2020), 3843. https: //doi.org/10.3390/app10113843 [46] Martin Gjoreski, Mitja Luštrek, Matjaž Gams, and Hristijan Gjoreski. 2017. Monitoring Stress with a Wrist Device Using Context. Journal of Biomedical Informatics 73 (Sept. 2017), 159–170. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2017.08.006 [47] Martin Gjoreski, Mitja Luštrek, and Veljko Pejović. 2018. My Watch Says I’m Busy: Inferring Cognitive Load with Low-Cost Wearables. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM International Joint Conference and 2018 International Symposium on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and Wearable Computers (UbiComp ’18) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1234–1240. https://doi.org/10. 1145/3267305.3274113 [48] Lewis R. Goldberg. 1992. The Development of Markers for the Big-Five Factor Structure. Psychological Assessment 4, 1 (March 1992), 26–42. https://doi.org/10.1037/1040-3590.4.1.26 [49] Nitesh Goyal and Susan R. Fussell. 2017. Intelligent Interruption Management Using Electro Dermal Activity Based Physiological Sensor for Collaborative Sensemaking. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 1, 3 (Sept. 2017), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1145/3130917 [50] Kunal Gupta, Sam W. T. Chan, Yun Suen Pai, Nicholas Strachan, John Su, Alexander Sumich, Suranga Nanayakkara, and Mark Billinghurst. 2022. Total VREcall: Using Biosignals to Recognize Emotional Autobiographical Memory in Virtual Reality. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 6, 2 (July 2022), 55:1–55:21. https://doi.org/10.1145/3534615 [51] Eija Haapalainen, SeungJun Kim, Jodi F. Forlizzi, and Anind K. Dey. 2010. Psycho-Physiological Measures for Assessing Cognitive Load. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp ’10) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 301–310. https://doi.org/10.1145/1864349.1864395 [52] Judith M. Harackiewicz, Jessi L. Smith, and Stacy J. Priniski. 2016. Interest Matters: The Importance of Promoting Interest in Education. Policy Insights from the Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3, 2 (Oct. 2016), 220–227. https://doi.org/10.1177/2372732216655542 [53] Morgan Harvey, Marc Langheinrich, and Geoff Ward. 2016. Remembering through Lifelogging: A Survey of Human Memory Augmentation. Pervasive and Mobile Computing 27 (April 2016), 14–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmcj.2015.12.002 [54] J.A. Healey and R.W. Picard. 2005. Detecting Stress during Real-World Driving Tasks Using Physiological Sensors.IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 6, 2 (June 2005), 156–166. https://doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2005.848368 [55] Judith S. Heinisch, Christoph Anderson, and Klaus David. 2019. Angry or Climbing Stairs? Towards Physiological Emotion Recognition in the Wild. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops (PerCom Workshops) . IEEE Computer Society, Kyoto, Japan, 486–491. https://doi.org/10.1109/PERCOMW.2019.8730725 [56] Katherine A. Herborn, James L. Graves, Paul Jerem, Neil P. Evans, Ruedi Nager, Dominic J. McCafferty, and Dorothy E.F. McKeegan. 2015. Skin Temperature Reveals the Intensity of Acute Stress. Physiology & Behavior 152 (Dec. 2015), 225–230. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.physbeh.2015.09.032 [57] Douglas L. Hintzman. 1976. Repetition and Memory. In Psychology of Learning and Motivation , Gordon H. Bower (Ed.). Vol. 10. Academic Press, United States, 47–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0079-7421(08)60464-8 Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. 106:28 • Laporte et al. [58] Anna Huang, Dong Wang, Run Zhao, and Qian Zhang. 2019. Au-Id: Automatic User Identification and Authentication through the Motions Captured from Sequential Human Activities Using RFID.Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 3, 2 (June 2019), 1–26. https://doi.org/10.1145/3328919 [59] Talha Iqbal, Andrew J. Simpkin, Davood Roshan, Nicola Glynn, John Killilea, Jane Walsh, Gerard Molloy, Sandra Ganly, Hannah Ryman, Eileen Coen, Adnan Elahi, William Wijns, and Atif Shahzad. 2022. Stress Monitoring Using Wearable Sensors: A Pilot Study and Stress-Predict Dataset. Sensors 22, 21 (Oct. 2022), 8135. https://doi.org/10.3390/s22218135 [60] Martin J. Jarvis. 1993. Does Caffeine Intake Enhance Absolute Levels of Cognitive Performance? Psychopharmacology 110, 1 (Jan. 1993), 45–52. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02246949 [61] Elizabeth A. Kensinger. 2009. Remembering the Details: Effects of Emotion. Emotion Review 1, 2 (April 2009), 99–113. https: //doi.org/10.1177/1754073908100432 [62] Elizabeth A. Kensinger and Suzanne Corkin. 2003. Memory Enhancement for Emotional Words: Are Emotional Words More Vividly Remembered than Neutral Words? Memory & Cognition 31, 8 (Dec. 2003), 1169–1180. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03195800 [63] S. Koelstra, C. Muhl, M. Soleymani, Jong-Seok Lee, A. Yazdani, T. Ebrahimi, T. Pun, A. Nijholt, and I. Patras. 2012. DEAP: A Database for Emotion Analysis ;Using Physiological Signals. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing 3, 1 (Jan. 2012), 18–31. https://doi.org/10.1109/T-AFFC.2011.15 [64] William H. Kruskal and W. Allen Wallis. 1952. Use of Ranks in One-Criterion Variance Analysis. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 47, 260 (Dec. 1952), 583–621. https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.1952.10483441 [65] Marc Langheinrich. 2001. Privacy by Design—Principles of Privacy-Aware Ubiquitous Systems. InUbicomp 2001: Ubiquitous Computing: International Conference Atlanta Georgia, USA, September 30–October 2, 2001 Proceedings . Springer, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 273–291. [66] K. Lankinen, J. Saari, R. Hari, and M. Koskinen. 2014. Intersubject Consistency of Cortical MEG Signals during Movie Viewing. NeuroImage 92 (May 2014), 217–224. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.02.004 [67] Matias Laporte, Daniele Gasparini, Martin Gjoreski, and Marc Langheinrich. 2023. Exploring LAUREATE - the Longitudinal multimodAl stUdent expeRience datasEt for AffecT and mEmory Research. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 2022 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and the 2022 ACM International Symposium on Wearable Computers (UbiComp/ISWC ’22 Adjunct) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 494–499. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544793.3563426 [68] Yichuan Liu, Elise A. Piazza, Erez Simony, Patricia A. Shewokis, Banu Onaral, Uri Hasson, and Hasan Ayaz. 2017. Measuring Speaker–Listener Neural Coupling with Functional near Infrared Spectroscopy. Scientific Reports 7, 1 (Feb. 2017), 43293. https: //doi.org/10.1038/srep43293 [69] Katharina Loibl and Nikol Rummel. 2014. Knowing What You Don’t Know Makes Failure Productive. Learning and Instruction 34 (Dec. 2014), 74–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2014.08.004 [70] Clare Madge, Julia Meek, Jane Wellens, and Tristram Hooley. 2009. Facebook, Social Integration and Informal Learning at University: ‘It Is More for Socialising and Talking to Friends about Work than for Actually Doing Work’.Learning, Media and Technology 34, 2 (June 2009), 141–155. https://doi.org/10.1080/17439880902923606 [71] Caroline R. Mahoney, Grace E. Giles, Bernadette P. Marriott, Daniel A. Judelson, Ellen L. Glickman, Paula J. Geiselman, and Harris R. Lieberman. 2019. Intake of Caffeine from All Sources and Reasons for Use by College Students. Clinical Nutrition 38, 2 (April 2019), 668–675. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clnu.2018.04.004 [72] Hisham Mallasi and Sulaiman Ainin. 2015. Investigating Knowledge Sharing Behaviour in Academic Environment. Journal of Organizational Knowledge Management 2015 (2015), 1–19. [73] Narendar Manohar, Freya MacMillan, Genevieve Z. Steiner, and Amit Arora. 2019. Recruitment of Research Participants. InHandbook of Research Methods in Health Social Sciences, Pranee Liamputtong (Ed.). Springer Singapore, Singapore, 71–98. https://doi.org/10.1007/978981-10-5251-4_75 [74] Lenora Marcellus. 2004. Are We Missing Anything? Pursuing Research on Attrition. Canadian Journal of Nursing Research Archive 36, 3 (Sept. 2004), 82–98. [75] Elena Marchiori, Evangelos Niforatos, and Luca Preto. 2017. Measuring the Media Effects of a Tourism-Related Virtual Reality Experience Using Biophysical Data. In Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism 2017, Roland Schegg and Brigitte Stangl (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 203–215. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-51168-9_15 [76] Valentina Markova, Todor Ganchev, and Kalin Kalinkov. 2019. CLAS: A Database for Cognitive Load, Affect and Stress Recognition. In 2019 International Conference on Biomedical Innovations and Applications (BIA) . IEEE, Varna, Bulgaria, 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/ BIA48344.2019.8967457 [77] Juan Abdon Miranda-Correa, Mojtaba Khomami Abadi, Nicu Sebe, and Ioannis Patras. 2021. AMIGOS: A Dataset for Affect, Personality and Mood Research on Individuals and Groups. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing 12, 2 (April 2021), 479–493. https: //doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2018.2884461 [78] Varun Mishra, Sougata Sen, Grace Chen, Tian Hao, Jeffrey Rogers, Ching-Hua Chen, and David Kotz. 2020. Evaluating the Reproducibility of Physiological Stress Detection Models. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 4, 4 (Dec. 2020), 147:1–147:29. https://doi.org/10.1145/3432220 Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. LAUREATE: A Dataset for Supporting Research in Affective Computing and Human Memory Augmentation • 106:29 [79] Karel Mundnich, Brandon M. Booth, Michelle L’Hommedieu, Tiantian Feng, Benjamin Girault, Justin L’Hommedieu, Mackenzie Wildman, Sophia Skaaden, Amrutha Nadarajan, Jennifer L. Villatte, Tiago H. Falk, Kristina Lerman, Emilio Ferrara, and Shrikanth Narayanan. 2020. TILES-2018, a Longitudinal Physiologic and Behavioral Data Set of Hospital Workers. Scientific Data 7, 1 (Oct. 2020), 354. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-00655-3 [80] Lucas Hermann Negri and Christophe Vestri. 2017. Lucashn/Peakutils: V1.1.0. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.887917 [81] Fred Paas and Paul Ayres. 2014. Cognitive Load Theory: A Broader View on the Role of Memory in Learning and Education.Educational Psychology Review 26, 2 (June 2014), 191–195. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-014-9263-5 [82] I. Pavlidis, M. Dcosta, S. Taamneh, M. Manser, T. Ferris, R. Wunderlich, E. Akleman, and P. Tsiamyrtzis. 2016. Dissecting Driver Behaviors Under Cognitive, Emotional, Sensorimotor, and Mixed Stressors. Scientific Reports 6, 1 (May 2016), 25651. https://doi.org/10. 1038/srep25651 [83] Pauline Pérez, Jens Madsen, Leah Banellis, Ba s,ak Türker, Federico Raimondo, Vincent Perlbarg, Melanie Valente, Marie-Cécile Niérat, Louis Puybasset, Lionel Naccache, Thomas Similowski, Damian Cruse, Lucas C. Parra, and Jacobo D. Sitt. 2021. Conscious Processing of Narrative Stimuli Synchronizes Heart Rate between Individuals. Cell Reports 36, 11 (Sept. 2021), 109692. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109692 [84] Rosalind W. Picard. 2000. Affective Computing (1. paperback ed ed.). MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. [85] Rosalind W. Picard, Szymon Fedor, and Yadid Ayzenberg. 2016. Multiple Arousal Theory and Daily-Life Electrodermal Activity Asymmetry. Emotion Review 8, 1 (Jan. 2016), 62–75. https://doi.org/10.1177/1754073914565517 [86] E. Ashby Plant, K. Anders Ericsson, Len Hill, and Kia Asberg. 2005. Why Study Time Does Not Predict Grade Point Average across College Students: Implications of Deliberate Practice for Academic Performance. Contemporary Educational Psychology 30, 1 (Jan. 2005), 96–116. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cedpsych.2004.06.001 [87] Stephen R. Porter, Michael E. Whitcomb, and William H. Weitzer. 2004. Multiple Surveys of Students and Survey Fatigue.New Directions for Institutional Research 2004, 121 (2004), 63–73. https://doi.org/10.1002/ir.101 [88] Anne Kerstin Reimers, Guido Knapp, and Carl-Detlev Reimers. 2018. Effects of Exercise on the Resting Heart Rate: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Interventional Studies. Journal of Clinical Medicine 7, 12 (Dec. 2018), 503. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm7120503 [89] Fabien Ringeval, Andreas Sonderegger, Juergen Sauer, and Denis Lalanne. 2013. Introducing the RECOLA Multimodal Corpus of Remote Collaborative and Affective Interactions. In 2013 10th IEEE International Conference and Workshops on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (FG). IEEE, Shanghai, China, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1109/FG.2013.6553805 [90] Tobias Röddiger, Christopher Clarke, Paula Breitling, Tim Schneegans, Haibin Zhao, Hans Gellersen, and Michael Beigl. 2022. Sensing with Earables: A Systematic Literature Review and Taxonomy of Phenomena. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 6, 3 (Sept. 2022), 1–57. https://doi.org/10.1145/3550314 [91] Henry L. Roediger and Jeffrey D. Karpicke. 2006. Test-Enhanced Learning: Taking Memory Tests Improves Long-Term Retention. Psychological Science 17, 3 (March 2006), 249–255. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01693.x [92] Mintra Ruensuk, Eunyong Cheon, Hwajung Hong, and Ian Oakley. 2020. How Do You Feel Online: Exploiting Smartphone Sensors to Detect Transitory Emotions during Social Media Use. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 4, 4 (Dec. 2020), 150:1–150:32. https://doi.org/10.1145/3432223 [93] Vathsala Sagayadevan and Senthu Jeyaraj. 2012. The Role of Emotional Engagement in Lecturer-Student Interaction and the Impact on Academic Outcomes of Student Achievement and Learning. Journal of the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning 12, 3 (Sept. 2012), 1–30. [94] Yahya Samian and Norah Md Noor. 2012. Student’s Perception on Good Lecturer Based on Lecturer Performance Assessment. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 56 (Oct. 2012), 783–790. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.09.716 [95] Akane Sano, Weixuan Chen, Daniel Lopez-Martinez, Sara Taylor, and Rosalind W. Picard. 2019. Multimodal Ambulatory Sleep Detection Using LSTM Recurrent Neural Networks. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics 23, 4 (July 2019), 1607–1617. https://doi.org/10.1109/JBHI.2018.2867619 [96] Corina Sas, Tomasz Fratczak, Matthew Rees, Hans Gellersen, Vaiva Kalnikaite, Alina Coman, and Kristina Höök. 2013. AffectCam: Arousal- Augmented Sensecam for Richer Recall of Episodic Memories. In CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems on - CHI EA ’13 . ACM Press, Paris, France, 1041. https://doi.org/10.1145/2468356.2468542 [97] Urs Schallberger. 2005. Kurzskalen Zur Erfassung Der Positiven Aktivierung, Negativen Aktivierung Und Valenz in Experience Sampling Studien (PANAVA-KS).Forschungsberichte aus dem Projekt:“Qualität des Erlebens in Arbeit und Freizeit 6 (2005), 1–87. [98] Florian Schaule, Jan Ole Johanssen, Bernd Bruegge, and Vivian Loftness. 2018. Employing Consumer Wearables to Detect Office Workers’ Cognitive Load for Interruption Management. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 2, 1 (March 2018), 32:1–32:20. https://doi.org/10.1145/3191764 [99] Philip Schmidt, Attila Reiss, Robert Duerichen, Claus Marberger, and Kristof Van Laerhoven. 2018. Introducing WESAD, a Multimodal Dataset for Wearable Stress and Affect Detection. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction (ICMI ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 400–408. https://doi.org/10.1145/3242969.3242985 [100] Stefan Schneegass, Bastian Pfleging, Nora Broy, Albrecht Schmidt, and Frederik Heinrich. 2013. A Data Set of Real World Driving to Assess Driver Workload. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. 106:30 • Laporte et al. Applications - AutomotiveUI ’13. ACM Press, Eindhoven, Netherlands, 150–157. https://doi.org/10.1145/2516540.2516561 [101] Marc Schreiber and Gregor J. Jenny. 2020. Development and Validation of the ‘Lebender Emoticon PANAVA’ Scale (LE-PANAVA) for Digitally Measuring Positive and Negative Activation, and Valence via Emoticons. Personality and Individual Differences 160 (July 2020), 109923. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2020.109923 [102] Corinne A. Seals. 2016. Dealing with Participant Attrition in Longitudinal Studies. In Doing Research in Applied Linguistics . Routledge, Oxfordshire, England, UK. [103] Philip Sedgwick. 2012. What Is Recall Bias? BMJ 344 (May 2012), e3519. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.e3519 [104] Abigail J. Sellen and Steve Whittaker. 2010. Beyond Total Capture: A Constructive Critique of Lifelogging. Commun. ACM 53, 5 (May 2010), 70. https://doi.org/10.1145/1735223.1735243 [105] Fred Shaffer, Rollin McCraty, and Christopher L. Zerr. 2014. A Healthy Heart Is Not a Metronome: An Integrative Review of the Heart’s Anatomy and Heart Rate Variability. Frontiers in Psychology 5 (2014), 1–19. [106] Kshitij Sharma, Evangelos Niforatos, Michail Giannakos, and Vassilis Kostakos. 2020. Assessing Cognitive Performance Using Physiological and Facial Features: Generalizing across Contexts. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 4, 3 (Sept. 2020), 95:1–95:41. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411811 [107] Stephanie M. Sherman, Timothy P. Buckley, Elsa Baena, and Lee Ryan. 2016. Caffeine Enhances Memory Performance in Young Adults during Their Non-optimal Time of Day. Frontiers in Psychology 7 (2016), 1–9. [108] Jefferson A. Singer and Peter Salovey. 1988. Mood and Memory: Evaluating the Network Theory of Affect. Clinical Psychology Review 8, 2 (Jan. 1988), 211–251. https://doi.org/10.1016/0272-7358(88)90060-8 [109] Gašper Slapničar, Nejc Mlakar, and Mitja Luštrek. 2019. Blood Pressure Estimation from Photoplethysmogram Using a Spectro-Temporal Deep Neural Network. Sensors 19, 15 (Aug. 2019), 3420. https://doi.org/10.3390/s19153420 [110] Wilfried Smidt. 2015. Big Five Personality Traits as Predictors of the Academic Success of University and College Students in Early Childhood Education. Journal of Education for Teaching 41, 4 (Aug. 2015), 385–403. https://doi.org/10.1080/02607476.2015.1080419 [111] Ramanathan Subramanian, Julia Wache, Mojtaba Khomami Abadi, Radu L. Vieriu, Stefan Winkler, and Nicu Sebe. 2018. ASCERTAIN: Emotion and Personality Recognition Using Commercial Sensors. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing 9, 2 (April 2018), 147–160. https://doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2016.2625250 [112] Aimée M. Surprenant and Ian Neath. 2009. Principles of Memory. Psychology Press, New York. [113] Luma Tabbaa, Ryan Searle, Saber Mirzaee Bafti, Md Moinul Hossain, Jittrapol Intarasisrisawat, Maxine Glancy, and Chee Siang Ang. 2021. VREED: Virtual Reality Emotion Recognition Dataset Using Eye Tracking & Physiological Measures. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 5, 4 (Dec. 2021), 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1145/3495002 [114] Jianhua Tao and Tieniu Tan. 2005. Affective Computing: A Review. In Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction , David Hutchison, Takeo Kanade, Josef Kittler, Jon M. Kleinberg, Friedemann Mattern, John C. Mitchell, Moni Naor, Oscar Nierstrasz, C. Pandu Rangan, Bernhard Steffen, Madhu Sudan, Demetri Terzopoulos, Dough Tygar, Moshe Y. Vardi, Gerhard Weikum, Jianhua Tao, Tieniu Tan, and Rosalind W. Picard (Eds.). Vol. 3784. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 981–995. https://doi.org/10.1007/11573548_125 [115] Howard Taras and William Potts-Datema. 2005. Chronic Health Conditions and Student Performance at School. Journal of School Health 75, 7 (2005), 255–266. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1746-1561.2005.tb06686.x [116] Sara Taylor, Natasha Jaques, Ehimwenma Nosakhare, Akane Sano, and Rosalind Picard. 2020. Personalized Multitask Learning for Predicting Tomorrow’s Mood, Stress, and Health. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing 11, 2 (April 2020), 200–213. https: //doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2017.2784832 [117] Sara Taylor, Natasha Jaques, Weixuan Chen, Szymon Fedor, Akane Sano, and Rosalind Picard. 2015. Automatic Identification of Artifacts in Electrodermal Activity Data. In 2015 37th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC). IEEE, IEEE, Milan, 1934–1937. https://doi.org/10.1109/EMBC.2015.7318762 [118] Susanne Vogel and Lars Schwabe. 2016. Learning and Memory under Stress: Implications for the Classroom. npj Science of Learning 1, 1 (June 2016), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1038/npjscilearn.2016.11 [119] Lin Wang, Hristijan Gjoreski, Mathias Ciliberto, Paula Lago, Kazuya Murao, Tsuyoshi Okita, and Daniel Roggen. 2021. Three-Year Review of the 2018–2020 SHL Challenge on Transportation and Locomotion Mode Recognition From Mobile Sensors. Frontiers in Computer Science 3 (Sept. 2021), 713719. https://doi.org/10.3389/fcomp.2021.713719 [120] Rui Wang, Fanglin Chen, Zhenyu Chen, Tianxing Li, Gabriella Harari, Stefanie Tignor, Xia Zhou, Dror Ben-Zeev, and Andrew T. Campbell. 2014. StudentLife: Assessing Mental Health, Academic Performance and Behavioral Trends of College Students Using Smartphones. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing . ACM, Seattle Washington, 3–14. https://doi.org/10.1145/2632048.2632054 [121] Yan Wang, Wei Song, Wei Tao, Antonio Liotta, Dawei Yang, Xinlei Li, Shuyong Gao, Yixuan Sun, Weifeng Ge, Wei Zhang, and Wenqiang Zhang. 2022. A Systematic Review on Affective Computing: Emotion Models, Databases, and Recent Advances. Information Fusion 83–84 (July 2022), 19–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2022.03.009 [122] David Watson, Lee Anna Clark, and Auke Tellegen. 1988. Development and Validation of Brief Measures of Positive and Negative Affect: The PANAS Scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 54, 6 (1988), 1063–1070. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.54.6.1063 Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. LAUREATE: A Dataset for Supporting Research in Affective Computing and Human Memory Augmentation • 106:31 [123] Justin C. Wilson, Suku Nair, Sandro Scielzo, and Eric C. Larson. 2021. Objective Measures of Cognitive Load Using Deep Multi-Modal Learning: A Use-Case in Aviation. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 5, 1 (March 2021), 40:1–40:35. https://doi.org/10.1145/3448111 [124] Amy R Wolfson and Mary A Carskadon. 2003. Understanding Adolescent’s Sleep Patterns and School Performance: A Critical Appraisal. Sleep Medicine Reviews 7, 6 (Jan. 2003), 491–506. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1087-0792(03)90003-7 [125] Joanna C. Yau, Benjamin Girault, Tiantian Feng, Karel Mundnich, Amrutha Nadarajan, Brandon M. Booth, Emilio Ferrara, Kristina Lerman, Eric Hsieh, and Shrikanth Narayanan. 2022. TILES-2019: A Longitudinal Physiologic and Behavioral Data Set of Medical Residents in an Intensive Care Unit. Scientific Data 9, 1 (Sept. 2022), 536. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-022-01636-4 [126] Eugene B. Zechmeister and John J. Shaughnessy. 1980. When You Know That You Know and When You Think That You Know but You Don’t. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society 15, 1 (Jan. 1980), 41–44. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03329756 [127] Jianhua Zhang, Zhong Yin, Peng Chen, and Stefano Nichele. 2020. Emotion Recognition Using Multi-Modal Data and Machine Learning Techniques: A Tutorial and Review. Information Fusion 59 (July 2020), 103–126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2020.01.011 [128] Zheng Zhang, Jeff M. Girard, Yue Wu, Xing Zhang, Peng Liu, Umur Ciftci, Shaun Canavan, Michael Reale, Andy Horowitz, Huiyuan Yang, Jeffrey F. Cohn, Qiang Ji, and Lijun Yin. 2016. Multimodal Spontaneous Emotion Corpus for Human Behavior Analysis. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . IEEE, Las Vegas, NV, USA, 3438–3446. [129] Wei-Long Zheng and Bao-Liang Lu. 2015. Investigating Critical Frequency Bands and Channels for EEG-Based Emotion Recognition with Deep Neural Networks. IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development 7, 3 (Sept. 2015), 162–175. https://doi.org/10.1109/ TAMD.2015.2431497 APPENDIX A LIST OF FEATURES Table 13. List of features calculated from the raw data extracted from Empatica’s E4 Raw Signal No. of features Description of features Inter-Subject Correlation 4 One ISC per signal (EDA, HR, ACC and ST) PP intervals / IBI 26 •13 HRV features based on the PP intervals: ◦Time domain: mean heart rate, mean PP interval, the standard deviation of the PP intervals (also known as SDNN), the standard deviation of the squared successive differences (SDSD), the root of the mean of the squared successive differences (RMSSD), the proportion of successive differences that are larger than 20 milliseconds (pnn20), the proportion of successive differences that are larger than 50 milliseconds (pnn50), Poincare plot indices (SD1 and SD2) and their ratio (SD1/SD2). ◦Frequency domain: LF (total spectral power in bands between 0.04 and 0.15 Hz), HF total spectral power in bands between 0.15 and 0.4 Hz, and the ratio LF/HF. •13 HRV features based on Empatica’s IBI data Continuous Heart Rate 22 •11 statistical features of the raw signal •11 statistical features of the first derivative of the raw signal Blood Volume Pulse 22 •11 statistical features of the raw signal •11 statistical features of the first derivative of the raw signal Skin Temperature 22 •11 statistical features of the raw signal •11 statistical features of the first derivative of the raw signal Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. 106:32 • Laporte et al. Table 14. List of features calculated from the raw data extracted from Empatica’s E4 (continuation) Raw Signal No. of features Description of features Acceleration 50 •6 features: top 3 frequencies in the Power Spectral Density (PSD) and the 3 corresponding values •11 statistical features of the magnitude signal •11 statistical features of the first derivative of the magnitude signal •11 statistical features of the PSD •11 statistical features of the PSD’s first derivative Electrodermal Activity 63 •11 statistical features of the raw signal •11 statistical features of the first derivative of the raw signal •12 features from the raw EDA signal: mean squared amplitude (power of the signal), the sum of the positive amplitude changes, duration of the positive amplitude changes, rate of positive changes (i.e. positive amplitude changes per second), the sum of the first derivative of the tonic component, the mean value of the filtered EDA signal after subtracting the tonic component, and six features describing the power of the spectrum of the EDA signal in the frequency bands ([0-0.5] with a step of 0.1 Hz.) •19 features related to the SCRs: number of SCRs, rate of SCRs (i.e. SCRs per second), mean amplitude of all SCRs, eight features describing the biggest SCR in the given window (in Figure 4, the largest amplitude near the 20-th second) including amplitude change w.r.t. the start, amplitude change w.r.t. the end, increase duration w.r.t. the start, decrease duration w.r.t. the end, overall duration from the peak-start to the peak-end, the slope of the peak w.r.t. the start, the slope of the peak w.r.t. the end, and the ratio between the increase duration and the decrease duration. In addition to describing the biggest SCR, we also calculated the same eight features from all the SCRs in a given window and summarised them using averages, resulting in eight average values. •10 features related to periods with significant EDA changes: amplitude increase, amplitude decrease, duration of all increase and decrease segments (two features), the mean amplitude changes of the increase and the decrease segments (two features), the duration multiplied by by the amplitude changes (two features), the difference between the maximum and the minimum values on the increasing and decreasing segments (two features), and the speed of the changes (two features). The 11 statistical descriptors are: the first four statistical moments, the mean value of the 1st. and 2nd. derivative, the 25th and 75th percentiles, the quartile deviation, the difference between the maximum and minimum values, and the coefficient of variation. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. LAUREATE: A Dataset for Supporting Research in Affective Computing and Human Memory Augmentation • 106:33 APPENDIX B INITIAL SURVEY QUESTIONS Table 15. List of questions in the Initial Survey. Question types are Multiple Selection, Multiple Choice, and Free Text. N° Type Question Values 1 M.S. What do you usually have for a weekday breakfast? ’Cereal/Müsli’, ’Yoghurt’, ’Bread’, ’Eggs’, ’Fruit’, ’Vegetables’, ’Coffee’, ’Tea’, ’Milk’, ’Juice/Smoothie’, ’Energy drinks’, ’Other (please specify)’ 2 M.C. Do you exercise regularly? 0: ’No’, 1: ’Yes’ 2.1 M.S. What kind of exercise do you usually do? ’Aerobic Exercise (e.g. jogging, cycling, swimming)’, ’Anaerobic / Strength Conditioning (e.g. gym workout)’, ’Flexibility Training (e.g. Yoga)’, ’Sports (e.g. Soccer, Tennis)’, ’Other (please specify)’ 3 M.C. Do you smoke? 0: ’No, I never did’, 1: ’No, not anymore’ 2: ’Yes’, 3: ’I prefer not to say’ 3.1 M.C. How long ago did you quit? 1: ’Around 1 month ago’, 2: ’Around 3 months ago’, 3: ’Around 12 months ago’, 4: ’More than 12 months ago’ 3.2 M.C. How much do you usually smoke? 1: ’No more than 5 cigarettes a week’, 2: ’No more than 5 cigarettes a day’, 3: ’Between 6-10 cigarettes a day’, 4: ’More than 10 cigarettes a day’, 5: ’I prefer not to say’ 4 M.S. Which languages are your mother languages? ’English’, ’Italian’, ’German’, ’French’, ’Spanish’, ’Mandarin’, ’Arabic’, ’Not listed’ 5 M.C. How would you describe your English language level? 1: ’Basic (A1, A2)’ 2: ’Intermediate (B1, B2)’ 3: ’Proficient (C1, C2)’ 4: ’Native speaker’ 6 M.C. How likely are you to actively seek information from external sources (material not covered in class) during your studies? 1: ’Very unlikely’ 2: ’Unlikely’ 3: ’Likely’ 4: ’Very likely’ 7 M.C. How confident do you feel that you have sufficient academic skills and abilities for Course_0x? 1: ’Not confident at all’, 2: ’Slightly confident’, 3: ’Somewhat confident’, 4: ’Fairly confident’, 5: ’Completely confident’ 8 M.C. What kind of environment are you most likely to be studying in? 1: ’Quiet environment, alone’, 2: ’Quiet environment, group’ 3: ’Noisy environment, alone’, 4: ’Noisy environment, group’ 5: ’Other (please specify)’ 8.1 F.T. Please describe your usual study environment 9 M.C. What grade do you expect to achieve in Course_0x? 1: ’4.0 or below’ 2: ’Between 4.0 and 5.5 (included)’ 3: ’Between 6.0 and 7.0 (included)’ 4: ’Between 7.5 and 8.5 (included)’ 5: ’9.0 or more’ Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. 106:34 • Laporte et al. APPENDIX C DAILY SURVEY QUESTIONS Table 16. List of questions in the Daily Survey. Question types are Multiple Choice, Likert Scale, and Prompt (i.e., no question). N° Type Question Values 1 M.C. Did you attend the Course_0x Lecture today? 0: ’No’, 1: ’Yes’, 2: ’We did not have class today (or: not yet)’, 10.1.1 L.S. How much of today’s session have you understood? 1: ’Nothing at all’, 2: ’A little’, 3: ’Some of it’, 4: ’A lot’, 5: ’Everything’ 10.1.2 P. Please rank your feelings right after the Course_0x class with respect to the emotions specified in the following pages. 10.1.2.1 L.S. Satisfaction 1: ’Very satisfied’, 2: ’Somewhat satisfied’, 3: ’Undecided’, 4: ’Somewhat dissatisfied’, 5: ’Very dissatisfied’ 10.1.2.2 L.S. Energy 1: ’Full of energy’, 2: ’Somewhat energized’, 3: ’Undecided’, 4: ’Somewhat drained’, 5: ’No energy at all’ 10.1.2.3 L.S. Stress 1: ’Very stressed’, 2: ’Somewhat stressed’, 3: ’Undecided’, 4: ’Somewhat relaxed’, 5: ’Relaxed’ 10.1.2.4 L.S. Tiredness 1: ’Very tired’, 2: ’Somewhat tired’, 3: ’Undecided’, 4: ’Somewhat awake’, 5: ’Wide awake’ 10.1.2.5 L.S. Peacefulness 1: ’Very peaceful’, 2: ’Somewhat peaceful’, 3: ’Undecided’, 4: ’Somewhat angry’, 5: ’Very angry’ 10.1.2.6 L.S. Unhappiness 1: ’Very unhappy’, 2: ’Somewhat unhappy’, 3: ’Undecided’, 4: ’Somewhat happy’, 5: ’Very happy’ 10.1.2.7 L.S. Motivation 1: ’Spiritless’, 2: ’Somewhat spiritless’, 3: ’Undecided’, 4: ’Somewhat motivated’, 5: ’Highly motivated’ 10.1.2.8 L.S. Calmness 1: ’Very calm’, 2: ’Somewhat calm’, 3: ’Undecided’, 4: ’Somewhat nervous’, 5: ’Very nervous’ 10.1.2.9 L.S. Enthusiasm 1: ’Very enthusiastic’, 2: ’Somewhat enthusiastic’, 3: ’Undecided’, 4: ’Somewhat bored’, 5: ’Very bored’ 10.1.2.10 L.S. Worriedness 1: ’Very worried’, 2: ’Somewhat worried’, 3: ’Undecided’, 4: ’Somewhat free of worry’, 5: ’Free of worry’ Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. LAUREATE: A Dataset for Supporting Research in Affective Computing and Human Memory Augmentation • 106:35 Table 17. List of questions in the Daily Survey (continuation). Question types are Multiple Choice, and Likert Scale. N° Type Question Values 10.2 M.C. Did you study since yesterday’s survey? 1: ’Yes, for more than 1 hour’, 2: ’Yes, for less than 1 hour’, 0: ’No, I didn’t study 10.3 M.C. Did you exercise since yesterday’s survey? 1: ’Yes, for over 30 minutes’, 2: ’Yes, for less than 30 minutes’, 0: ’No’ 10.4 M.C. Did you have breakfast today? 1: ’Yes’, 0: ’No’, 2: ’I prefer not to answer’ 10.5 M.C. Did you have any caffeine (e.g. coffee, tea, energy drinks) this morning? 1: ’Yes’, 0: ’No’, 2: ’I prefer not to answer’ 10.6 L.S. How did you sleep last night? 1: ’Very badly’, 2: ’Badly’, 3: ’Normal/Fair’, 4: ’Well’, 5: ’Very well’ 10.1.2v2.1 L.S. What was your engagement level during this lecture? 1: ’Not engaged at all’, 2: ’Slightly engaged’, 3: ’Somewhat engaged’, 4: ’Moderately engaged’, 5: ’Extremely engaged’ 10.1.2v2.2 L.S. In your opinion, what was the engagement level of the presenter during this lecture? 1: ’Not engaged at all’, 2: ’Slightly engaged’, 3: ’Somewhat engaged’, 4: ’Moderately engaged’, 5: ’Extremely engaged’ 10.1.2v2.3 L.S. Please indicate your level of agreement with the following statement: "I lost track of the world while I was giving this presentation" 1: ’Strongly disagree’, 2: ’Disagree’, 3: ’Agree’, 4: ’Strongly agree’ 10.1.2v2.4 L.S. Happiness 1: ’Very unhappy’, 2: ’Somewhat unhappy’, 3: ’Undecided’, 4: ’Somewhat happy’, 5: ’Very happy’ 10.2.v2 M.C. Did you study (book reading, exercise solving, work on assignments) for the Course_0x class since yesterday’s survey? 1: ’Yes, for more than 1 hour’, 2: ’Yes, for less than 1 hour’, 0: ’No, I didn’t study’ Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. 106:36 • Laporte et al. APPENDIX D FINAL SURVEY QUESTIONS Table 18. List of questions in the Final Survey (pre-exam). Question types are Multiple Selection, Multiple Choice, Prompt (i.e., no question), and Likert Scale. N° Type Question Values 1 M.S. What do you usually have for a weekday breakfast? ’Cereal/Müsli’, ’Yoghurt’, ’Bread’, ’Eggs’, ’Fruit’, ’Vegetables’, ’Coffee’, ’Tea’, ’Milk’, ’Juice/Smoothie’, ’Energy drinks’, ’Other (please specify)’ 2 M.C. Did you exercise regularly in the past month? ’No’, ’Yes’ 2.1 M.S. What kind of exercise did you do? ’Aerobic Exercise (e.g. jogging, cycling, swimming)’, ’Anaerobic / Strength Conditioning (e.g. gym workout)’, ’Flexibility Training (e.g. Yoga)’, ’Sports (e.g. Soccer, Tennis)’, ’Other (please specify)’ 3 M.C. Do you smoke? ’No, I never did’ ’No, not anymore’ ’Yes’, ’I prefer not to say’ 3.1 M.C. How long ago did you quit? ’Around 1 month ago’, ’Around 3 months ago’, ’Around 12 months ago’, ’More than 12 months ago’ 3.2 M.C. How much do you usually smoke? ’No more than 5 cigarettes a week’, ’No more than 5 cigarettes a day’, ’Between 6-10 cigarettes a day’, ’More than 10 cigarettes a day’, ’I prefer not to say’ 4 M.C. In what kind of environment did you usually study for Course_0x during this semester? ’In a quiet environment, alone’ ’In a quiet environment in a group’ ’In a noisy environment, alone’ ’In a noisy environment in a group’ ’Other (please specify)’ 5 M.C. What grade do you expect to achieve in Course_0x? ’4.0 or below’ ’Between 4.0 and 5.5 (included)’ ’Between 6.0 and 7.0 (included)’ ’Between 7.5 and 8.5 (included)’ ’9.0 or more’ 6 M.C. How much information did you seek from external sources (material not covered in class) for Course_0x during this semester? ’Never’, ’Seldom’, ’Sometimes’, ’Often’ 7. P. To what extent do you agree with the following statements? 7.1 L.S. I feel comfortable around other students in the class 1: ’Strongly disagree’, 2: ’Disagree’, 3: ’Agree’, 4: ’Strongly agree’ 7.2 L.S. My relationship with other students has motivated me to study more or try to achieve a better grade 1: ’Strongly disagree’, 2: ’Disagree’, 3: ’Agree’, 4: ’Strongly agree’ Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. LAUREATE: A Dataset for Supporting Research in Affective Computing and Human Memory Augmentation • 106:37 Table 19. List of questions in the Final Survey (pre-exam) (continuation). Question types are Likert Scale and Prompt (i.e., no question). N° Type Question Values 7.3 L.S. I feel comfortable talking with the Professor 1: ’Strongly disagree’, 2: ’Disagree’, 3: ’Agree’, 4: ’Strongly agree’ 7.4 L.S. I was engaged with course materials (i.e., listening/assisting to lectures, doing readings, etc.) 1: ’Strongly disagree’, 2: ’Disagree’, 3: ’Agree’, 4: ’Strongly agree’ 7.5 L.S. I have learnt how to do my coursework in an efficient manner 1: ’Strongly disagree’, 2: ’Disagree’, 3: ’Agree’, 4: ’Strongly agree’ 7.6 L.S. Overall, I am satisfied with the learning experience of this course 1: ’Strongly disagree’, 2: ’Disagree’, 3: ’Agree’, 4: ’Strongly agree’ 8 L.S. What is your level of understanding of the theoretical concepts of the lectures? ’Very Poor’, ’Below Average’, ’Average’, ’Above Average’, ’Excellent’ 9. P. Please rate your level of understanding of the following theoretical topics: (full topic list available in dataset) 9.x L.S. Topic Name ’Very poor’, ’Below Average’, ’Average’, ’Above Average’, ’Excellent’ 10 L.S. What is your level of understanding for the practical skills of the Labs? ’Very Poor’, ’Below Average’, ’Average’, ’Above Average’, ’Excellent’ 11. P. Please rate your level of understanding of the following practical topics: (topic list available in dataset) 11.x L.S. Topic Name ’Very Poor’, ’Below Average’, ’Average’, ’Above Average’, ’Excellent’ 12,13,... P. The Big Five inventory (full question list available in dataset) Table 20. List of questions in the Final Survey (post-exam). Question types are Prompt (i.e., no question) and Likert Scale. N° Type Question Values 1 P. What was your level of preparedness for the following topics: (topic list available in dataset) 1.x L.S. Topic Name ’Very Poor’, ’Below Average’, ’Average’, ’Above Average’, ’Excellent’ Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. 106:38 • Laporte et al. APPENDIX E LECTURER SURVEY QUESTIONS Table 21. List of questions in the Lecturer’s Survey. Question types are Likert Scale, Numeric, and Prompt (i.e., no question) N° Type Text Values 1 L.S. What was your engagement level during your presentation? 1: ’Not engaged at all’ 2: ’Slightly engaged’ 3: ’Somewhat engaged’ 4: ’Moderately engaged’ 5: ’Extremely engaged’ 2 L.S. In your opinion, what was the engagement level of the audience during your presentation? 1: ’Not engaged at all’ 2: ’Slightly engaged’ 3: ’Somewhat engaged’ 4: ’Moderately engaged’ 5: ’Extremely engaged’ 3 L.S. Please indicate your level of agreement with the following statement: "I lost track of the world while I was giving this presentation" 1: ’Strongly disagree’ 2: ’Disagree’ 3: ’Agree’ 4: ’Strongly agree’ 4 N. Please rate your teaching performance in today’s class 1: ’Bad’, 5: ’Good’ 5 N. Please rate your level of preparation for today’s class 1: ’Bad’, 5: ’Good’ 6 P. Please rank your feelings right after the Course_0x class with respect to the emotions specified in the following pages. 6.1 L.S. Worriedness, Enthusiasm, Calmness, Motivation, Happiness, Peacefulness, Tiredness, Stress, Energy, Satisfaction Identical to "Daily Survey" Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. LAUREATE: A Dataset for Supporting Research in Affective Computing and Human Memory Augmentation • 106:39 APPENDIX F ADDITIONAL ANALYSES In this appendix, we will (i) explore some data trends throughout the semester (Appendix F.1), (ii) analyse selfreported engagement and its relationship with electrodermal activity features (Appendix F.2), and (iii) evaluate person-independent models for mood recognition (Appendix F.3). F.1 Trends throughout the Semester Longitudinal datasets benefit from the possibility to analyse trends throughout time. In particular, it is interesting to discover how participants’ behaviour changes, and what may be the reasons for those changes. Figures 8a and 8b are an example of two different changes in participants’ behaviour during the semester. (a) Number of answered surveys by participants throughout the semester. (b) Participants’ self-reported sleep quality throughout the semester. Each dot represents the mean over all students of the self-reported sleep quality values of the day. Fig. 8. Analysis of self-reports trends (Figure 8a, number of answered surveys; Figure 8b, self-reported sleep quality) throughout the semester. Figure 8a shows how the number of answered daily surveys decreases over time. Sadly, attrition and participants’ loss of interest [74, 102] are common problems in data collection. Even though we minimised the number of questions to avoid survey fatigue [87], some participants still expressed annoyance due to receiving notifications every day. It is important to remark that outliers in the bottom-left section of the plot are due to a technical glitch with the survey application. During the first∼20 days of the experiment, participants from course_01 were not able to receive surveys over the weekends, decreasing the number of answered surveys. On the other hand, outliers on the bottom right are due to course_02 taking their final exam three days before course_01, thus having finished the experiment and not answering any more surveys. Figure 8b presents the self-reported sleep quality of participants throughout the semester. Each value is the mean over all participants of the self-reported quality. Although the standard deviation is high, there is a general downward trend that implies that as the semester progresses, students feel that their sleep quality worsens. F.2 Engagement and Skin Conductance Responses’ Number of Peaks per Session Another interesting inclusion in our dataset are the affect ground truth labels, which can be combined with the corresponding physiological data from the lectures. This pairing would enable the possibility of training models Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. 106:40 • Laporte et al. for affect prediction. Among the extracted features from the EDA signal (Section 3.5.2 - Electrodermal Activity) we have the number of SCR peaks in 2-minute data windows. The SCR peaks represent increased physiological arousal, which previous work suggests could identify situations of momentary engagement [ 15]. However, these peaks may be generated by different stimuli not always related to emotional engagement [26]. Nevertheless, the presence of peaks continues to be relevant when compared to its absence, which may indicate uninteresting moments or poor motivation [6]. Figure 9 shows the analysis in our dataset of the physiological arousal, represented by the number of SCR peaks in the EDA signal, and participants’ self-reported engagement. Fig. 9. Comparison of the distribution of average number of peaks over all recording sessions grouped by participants’ self-reported engagement. The mean value of self-reported engagement over the whole experiment was calculated for each participant, and then participants were categorised according to that value into three bins of equal size. The SCR number of peaks is the average number of peaks per participant over all recording sessions. Figure 9 presents participants grouped according to their answers to the question "What was your engagement level during this lecture?" (i.e. 10.1.2v2.1, lecture_engagement, Appendix C). The mean self-reported lecture_engagement value was calculated for each participant. The participants were then divided into three equal-sized groups with similar self-reported engagement levels using quantile-based discretisation with three bins. The three groups were compared with regard to the total number of peaks of each member. The figure shows a tendency for students with high levels of self-reported engagement to also present a higher amount of peaks in their SCR signal. However, this tendency is not significant, as the Kruskal-Wallis statistical test fails to reject the null-hypothesis (with a 𝑝-value = 0.061). Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023. LAUREATE: A Dataset for Supporting Research in Affective Computing and Human Memory Augmentation • 106:41 F.3 Person-independent models (LOSO validation) Table 22. Mean Absolute Error for affect and mood regression models using questionnaire-based behaviour data only ( B), or behaviour data and Empatica data (B+E), or behaviour data with Normalised (Standardised Features) Empatica data (B+EN), or Baseline -no features- (Base (n.f.)). Each label is in the range [1, 5]. The dummy regressor outputs the mean value per label. The models were evaluated using LOSO cross-validation. Columns represent the labels as follows:understanding, satisfaction, energy, stress, tiredness, peacefulness, motivation, calmness, enthusiasm, worriedness, Positive Affect, Negative Affect and VAlence. N Model Input type und sat en str tir pea mot cal ent wor PA NA V A RF LOSO B 0.97 0.95 0.89 1 0.94 0.85 0.89 0.84 0.88 0.98 0.63 0.75 0.86 LGBM LOSO B 0.92 0.92 0.87 0.97 0.91 0.79 0.87 0.81 0.86 0.96 0.62 0.71 0.82 No RF LOSO B+E 0.92 0.92 0.88 0.95 0.92 0.80 0.89 0.82 0.85 0.95 0.62 0.69 0.84 LGBM LOSO B+E 0.95 0.93 0.87 0.95 0.94 0.82 0.89 0.82 0.86 0.99 0.62 0.69 0.86 RF B+EN 0.90 0.94 0.91 0.97 0.97 0.80 0.90 0.85 0.84 0.96 0.63 0.70 0.84 S.F. LGBM B+EN 0.93 0.97 0.92 0.96 0.98 0.79 0.91 0.85 0.86 0.99 0.66 0.68 0.87 Dummy Base (n.f.) 0.89 0.90 0.89 0.96 0.99 0.78 0.90 0.82 0.82 0.96 0.63 0.68 0.81 Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 7, No. 3, Article 106. Publication date: September 2023.