Stress Detection of Autistic Adults during Simulated Job Interviews Using a Novel Physiological Dataset and Machine Learning MIROSLA V A MIGOVICH , Department of Mechanical Engineering, Vanderbilt University DEEKSHA ADIANI , Department of Computer Science, Vanderbilt University MICHAEL BREEN , Robotics and Autonomous Systems Lab, Vanderbilt University AMY SW ANSON , Treatment and Research Institute for Autism Spectrum Disorder (TRIAD), Vanderbilt University Medical Center TIMOTHY J. VOGUS , Owen Graduate School of Management, Vanderbilt University NILANJAN SARKAR , Department of Mechanical Engineering, Vanderbilt University The interview process has been identified as one of the major barriers to employment of autistic individuals, which contributes to the staggering rate of under and unemployment of autistic adults. Decreasing stress during the interview has been shown to improve interview performance. However, in order to effectively provide insights on stress to both interviewees and interviewers, it is necessary to first effectively measure stress. This work explores physiological stress detection through wearable sensing as a means of obtaining quantitative stress measures from young autistic adults undergoing a virtual simulated interview using supervised machine learning techniques. Several supervised learning models were explored and it was found that Elastic Net Regression had the best accuracy with individual models with an accuracy of 84.8% while Support Vector Regression models evaluated with leave-one-out cross validation had a group accuracy of 75.4%. The predictions from the stress model were used with data visualization techniques in order to provide insights on the interview process from both a group and individual viewpoint, showing that stress trends can be found and evaluated using the stress model. This work also addresses a major gap in physiological stress detection literature by presenting a novel dataset of physiological data and ground truth labels for 15 autistic young adults undergoing a simulated interview. This research was funded by a Microsoft AI for Accessibility grant, by the National Science Foundation under awards 1936970 and 2033413 and by the National Science Foundation Research Traineeship DGE 19-22697. Authors’ addresses: M. Migovich (Corresponding author) and N. Sarkar, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Vanderbilt University, 2400 Highland Ave Room 101 Nashville, TN 37212; e-mails: {miroslava.migovich, nilanjan.sarkar}@vanderbilt.edu; D. Adiani, Department of Computer Science, Vanderbilt University, 2400 Highland Ave Room 515 Nashville, TN 37212; e-mail: deeksha.m.adiani@vanderbilt.edu; M. Breen, Robotics and Autonomous Systems Lab, Vanderbilt University, 2400 Highland Ave Room 518 Nashville, TN 37212; e-mail: mbreen703@gmail.com; A. Swanson, Treatment and Research Institute for Autism Spectrum Disorder (TRIAD), Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 1500 21st Avenue South 4255 Village at Vanderbilt Nashville, TN 37212; e-mail: amy.r.swanson@vumc.org; T. J. Vogus. Owen Graduate School of Management, Vanderbilt University, 401 21st Ave South Office 319 Nashville, TN 37203; e-mail: timothy.j.vogus@vanderbilt.Edu. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org . © 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM 1936-7228/2024/03-ART2 https://doi.org/10.1145/3639709 ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. 2:2 M. Migovich et al. CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Interaction paradigms ; Information visualization; • Computing methodologies → Supervised learning by regression ; Additional Key Words and Phrases: Autism Spectrum Disorder, virtual job interview, physiological stress detection, affective computing ACM Reference Format: Miroslava Migovich, Deeksha Adiani, Michael Breen, Amy Swanson, Timothy J. Vogus, and Nilanjan Sarkar. 2024. Stress Detection of Autistic Adults during Simulated Job Interviews Using a Novel Physiological Dataset and Machine Learning. ACM Trans. Access. Comput. 17, 1, Article 2 (March 2024), 25 pages. https://doi.org/ 10.1145/3639709 1 INTRODUCTION Approximately 1.5 million individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder ( ASD ) will be reaching adulthood and entering the workforce in the next decade [Hurley-Hanson et al. 2020 ]. ASD is characterized by neurodevelopmental differences that lead to challenges with social skills, communication, and restrictive or repetitive patterns of behavior [American Psychiatric Association 2013 ]. The aforementioned challenges contribute to the high rate of unemployment among Autistic individuals 1 [Fong et al. 2021 ; Whetzel 2014 ], even though a large majority of them report a desire to work [Roux et al. 2017 ; Taylor et al. 2019 ]. Multiple factors impact the ability of autistic individuals to find and maintain employment, including workplace discrimination, anxiety and stress, and challenges in social behavior and communication [Taylor et al. 2019 ; Trakoli 2021 ]. Unemployment can lead to social, financial, and psychological costs for autistic young adults and their families, productivity loss due to labor and skill shortages, and societal costs to support individuals that are unable to obtain employment [Hurley-Hanson et al. 2020 ]. Among the difficulties, the interview process for employment has been identified by selfadvocates and their caregivers as one of the largest barriers to entering the workforce [Anderson et al. 2021 ; Burke et al. 2020 ]. Often times, an autistic job candidate possesses the skills for a job, but is unable to interview well when compared to neurotypical applicants as judged by neurotypical interviewers [Smith et al. 2021 ]. It is reported that many autistic individuals experience high stress during interviews [Hutchinson et al. 2019 ] and improving stress responses can improve interview performance [McCarthy and Goffin 2004 ]. Initial approaches for supporting successful employment experiences for people on the autism spectrum focused on providing on-the-job support in specialized programs often through job coaching and structured training [Gilson and Carter 2016 ; Hill et al. 2013 ; Montgomery et al. 2011 ; Wehman et al. 2017 ]. However, it is also important to adapt the interview process such that employers impose less unintended stress on autistic job candidates. In parallel, research on interview simulators has found training can improve interview performance [Smith et al. 2021 ]. Specifically, Virtual Reality ( VR ) based interview simulators allow users to practice and improve their social communication and verbal responses to interview questions [Burke et al. 2018 ; Smith et al. 2014 ; Strickland, Coles, and Southern 2013 ] while also using eye contact and speech volume data to assess distress and non-verbal behavior [DeVault et al. 2013 , 2014 ; Xu et al. 2015 ]. Current approaches focus on providing feedback and strategies to the interviewee but fail to gather stress data directly or provide stress response-based insights, which are necessary to develop effective stress management strategies and adaptations to the interview that are beneficial to both the interviewee and the interviewer. That is, despite some research on stress training [Hutchinson et al. 2019 ], there is a need for reliable, quantitative measures of stress to better target and sustain existing training [Newsome et al. 2019 ]. 1 Due to the preference of autistic individuals and their families [Keating et al. n.d.], we have adopted identify-first language for our disability-related terminology. ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. Stress Detection of Autistic Adults 2:3 The goal of this work is to measure stress in a quantitative manner. This work will be expanded in the future to provide autistic individuals with emotion regulation strategies during interviews. We provide initial insights by developing a visualization tool that allows an understanding of stress response through visualization during the course of a VR-based simulated interview [Adiani et al. 2022 , 2023 ]. Previous publications detail the design of the VR-based simulated interview with stakeholder input and present an overview of data collected and initial results. This work will expand on the collection of physiological data and the design and implementation of the stress models. Physiological stress detection has been used to address the limitations of self-report-based stress detection [Healey 2000 ; Migovich et al. 2021 ; Sarkar 2002 ]. The autonomic nervous system responds to stress via the parasympathetic nervous system ( PNS ) and sympathetic nervous system ( SNS ), which are responsible for maintaining homeostasis and bringing the body back to baseline and responding to the stimuli, respectively [Hagemann et al. 2003 ]. The SNS releases stress hormones that cause measurable responses in various organs and motor neurons that translate to physiological changes. These physiological responses are involuntary and immediate [Cacioppo et al. 2017 ; Friedman 2010 ; Kim et al. 2018 ]. This is especially useful when measuring stress because physiological responses are primarily involuntary, unlike body language or speech [Shu et al. 2018 ]. To our knowledge, there is no reported work on measuring physiology-based stress response during a simulated interview for either neurotypical or autistic individuals. Additionally, no datasets for physiology-based stress detection in autistic individuals are available. The contributions of this article include a novel dataset of labeled stress points and physiology from autistic individuals during a simulated VR job interview, design of individual and group physiology-based stress detection models for autistic adults, and an interactive data visualization tool that allows for exploration of stress trends during a simulated interview. The design of stress mitigation strategies is the next step and is outside the scope of the current work. Section 2 will expand on the related works mentioned in the introduction. Section 3 will provide a system description including a brief overview of the VR interview system, the theoretical background on machine learning-based stress detection, and the design of the visualization tool. Section 4 will detail the experimental procedure together with the collection and preprocessing of the physiological data, highlighting our first and second contribution. Section 5 will present the results and a discussion, including the final contribution of the interactive dashboard. Section 6 will conclude the article and will explore the implications of the work for research and practice, as well as address limitations of the current work. 2 RELATED WORKS 2.1 Transition to Employment Support and Digital Simulated Interviews Support for autistic individuals’ transition to employment has explored multiple methods, ranging from immersion in work environments [Gilson and Carter 2016 ; Wehman et al. 2017 ] to the use of assistive technologies to aid in completion of vocational tasks [Gentry et al. 2015 ; Hill et al. 2013 ]. The employment interview as an initial and primary barrier to the employment for autistic young adults has also received attention and intervention typically via support from job coaches. The job coaches helped to individualize job profiles as a means of identifying personal job goals that meet desired work conditions and amount of time worked per week and provided assistance in completing job applications and offered interview training [Wehman et al. 2017 ]. Including a job coach in the existing interview models did yield improved employment outcomes, however, Wehman et al. acknowledge the limitation of only providing intervention to the autistic individual, which can lead to employers who are not informed and may limit their hiring of autistic individuals based solely on interview performance [Wehman et al. 2017 ]. Researchers in Norris et al. [ 2020 ] ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. 2:4 M. Migovich et al. explored questioning methods that could improve autistic individual’s responses to employment questions. Their work found that changing prompt types improved the quality of answers that they received. For example, asking structured questions, as opposed to open ended questions, was effective for eliciting memories and personal facts while semantic prompts worked best for personal characteristics, such as those asked for during job interviews. Using visual-verbal prompts with the question broken into sections such as: when it happened, where it happened, and people and objects involved increased recall of information for autistic individuals [Norris et al. 2020 ]. These methods are important to explore and incorporate in interview protocols for employers. Recent efforts have included computer-based simulations to provide accessible interview exposure. ViTA, a virtual interactive training agent, was developed to improve interview performance through practicing a set of 10-12 questions that allow participants to emphasize their strengths and provides situational and behavior examples [Burke et al. 2018 ]. Initial studies showed that performance in a face-to-face interview improved after four sessions with ViTA [Burke et al. 2018 ], and a recent efficacy study reinforced that claim [Burke et al. 2020 ]. Another job interview training program for autistic teens, JobTIPS, used video modeling and VR-based practice sessions in order to assess interview skills after training. Their results showed that the program did improve verbal responses to interview questions, however, had no effect on body language or other non-verbal features [Strickland et al. 2013 ]. Smith et al. [Smith et al. 2014 ], Bell and Weinstein [Bell and Weinstein 2011 ], and SIMmersion LLC joined together to create Virtual Reality Job Interview Training ( VR-JIT ), which uses interactive prerecorded videos and speech recognition to increase interview skills among autistic trainees [Smith et al. 2015 ]. Smith then adapted the system for transition age youth and deployed VIT-TAY, Virtual Interview Training for Transition Age Youth. Transition age youth (ages 16–26) who trained with VIT-TAY had better interview skills than controls who did not train with VIT-TAY [Smith et al. 2021 ]. While the existing support systems and digital interview practice are shown to be effective and have benefits, the current systems lack the ability to capture quantitative stress responses which may limit their efficacy in improving interview performance. 2.2 Affective Computing Affective computing is defined as the study of how computational systems react and recognize human emotions by means of computational interface [Picard 1995 ]. Affective computing can rely on visible inputs, such as the eye contact and speech volume in DeVault et al. [ 2013 , 2014 ] and Xu et al. [ 2015 ] and is used to sense affect and create systems that intricately incorporate affect [Calvo et al. 2015 ]. Emotions are thought to exist as a method for efficient mobilization and organization of highly differentiated systems within the human body when a threat or stressor is presented [Levenson 2014 ] allowing the high cortex function to be overridden with automated responses such as fight or flight [Bota et al. 2019 ]. The autonomic nervous system ( ANS ) regulates involuntary physiologic processes [Waxenbaum et al. 2022 ], including our responses to external demands that cause stress. In the context of this article, it is important to be able to computationally recognize and measure stress, which will then guide adaptation of the virtual interview in a way that reduces stress and allows for overall better interview performance [McCarthy and Goffin 2004 ]. Traditional methods of obtaining stress values relied on self-reports or questionnaires such as the Perceived Stress Scale [Cohen et al. 1994 ] or the Subjective Units of Distress Survey [Mash and Terdal 1988 ], however, these methods delay the collection of the stress data and are subjective [Smets et al. 2019 ]. The quality and reliability of self-reports from autistic individuals may be lower due to their challenges with emotional recognition [Thoen et al. 2021 ]. Some physical features, or features that can be seen on the surface, are sensitive to stress Sharma and Gedeon [ 2012 ]. These features include facial expressions, eye related features, and body ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. Stress Detection of Autistic Adults 2:5 gesturing. Researchers in [Sharma and Gedeon 2012 ] used computer vision to detect changes in facial expression during low stress and high stress scenarios, including negative social feedback and time pressure in workload scenarios. When compared to the expressive elements identified by a human observer, computer vision-based techniques have the potential to identify high and low stress in a majority of subjects [Sharma and Gedeon 2012 ]. Pupil diameter and blink rate were used with mathematical questions, horizontal step stimuli, and questionnaires in order to find correlation between stress and eye measures in Jyotsna and Amudha [ 2018 ] while [Liao et al. 2005 ] used gaze spatial distribution to infer stress levels. Authors in Aigrain et al. [ 2018 ] extracted facial action units from facial expression as well as body posturing and movement frequency as part of their comparison of behavioral and physiological features for stress detection. They found that while behavioral features, including the facial expression and body movement, provide good classification of stress, physiological features were in the top five features for both external observer assessments and physiology expert assessments. In virtual reality, speech was used by Arushi et al. [ 2022 ] to detect stress from voice features to apply in a virtual reality public speaking training application. In another study, eye gaze behavior and pupil diameter were used to classify stress during with football goalkeeping scenario in virtual reality [Stoeve et al. 2022 ]. However, the majority of stress classification in virtual reality relies on physiological signals [Cho et al. 2017 ; Gaggioli et al. 2014 ; Tao et al. 2022 ]. Affective states, such as stress, are psychophysiological constructs [Greene et al. 2016 ] that can be correlated to changes in physiology. Stress causes chemical and hormonal responses within the body that can be measured through changes in parameters such as heart rate and electrodermal activity ( EDA ) [Bota et al. 2019 ; Panicker and Gayathri 2019 ]. Physiological features possess several advantages when used for stress detection. These advantages include being able to record continuous and uninterrupted readings with non-invasive and cost-effective devices [Panicker and Gayathri 2019 ]. Many physiological responses are instantaneous [Cacioppo et al. 2017 ] and generally cannot be masked by individuals, unlike facial expressions and body language. Physiological features are also ideal when working with autistic individuals due to the atypical presentation of facial expressions, gaze, body gestures, and eye gaze that characterize autism [American Psychiatric Association 2013 ]. Research in physiology-based affective computing focuses on two main aspects: being able to accurately detect affect using physiology, and applying the trained models in order to adapt interactions with social robots or avatars. Researchers in Shi et al. [ 2010 ] exposed subjects to four stressors representing social, physical, and mental challenges. A variety of features were extracted from electrocardiograms ( ECGs ), heart rate, respiration, skin conductance, and temperature and used to train a support vector machine model. The personalized models were able to detect stress with 62% precision [Shi et al. 2010 ]. Marin-Morales et al. validated the use of virtual environments in eliciting different emotional states by creating four virtual rooms meant to evoke different arousal-valence combinations [Marín-Morales et al. 2018 ]. Marin-Morales et al. also validated the capacity of ECG and electroencephalographs ( EEG ) to detect various emotions, as presented in the Circumplex Model of Affects [Marín-Morales et al. 2018 ; Posner et al. 2005 ]. Sarabdani et al. explored the use of physiological detection of affective states in children with autism by evoking varying levels of valence and arousal while measuring ECGs, respiration, skin conductance, and temperature. They were able to differentiate a subset of the affective states at above 80% accuracy [Sarabadani et al. 2020 ]. More recently, Migovich et al. explored how heart rate variability features vary between autistic young adults and their neurotypical peers when exposed to a known lab-based distress tolerance task [Migovich et al. 2022 ]. In the domain of application of trained models, Sarkar proposed the use wearable biofeedback sensors in order to infer affective states and correlate the affective states to the actions of a robot ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. 2:6 M. Migovich et al. in order to alter the state of the human [Sarkar 2002 ]. The VR Adaptive Simulation ( VRAS ) proposes a system that gradually exposes military trainees to stressful stimuli and uses physiology informed inference of emotional response in order to adapt the training [Ćosićet al. 2010 ]. In the design of their physiology-based affect recognition, [Bian et al. 2015 ] used heart rate variability, respiration, and both the phasic and tonic responses from EDA, along with other features, to determine engagement levels of autistic teenagers. These initial physiological signals were then combined with eyegaze [Wade et al. 2016 ] and EEG data to measure cognitive load [Zhang et al. 2017 ]. This work was expanded to adapt the difficulty of a VR-based driving simulator based on engagement. They found that engagement-based adaptation of the driving simulator was more engaging and enjoyable than the performance-sensitive adaptation [Bian et al. 2019 ]. More recently, the combination of affective detection and virtual reality has been explored for VR based exposure therapy by Rahman et al. Their work established a pipeline as a means of model selection for arousal detection in VR. This works sets a foundation for exploring different algorithms and their ability to detect affective states with physiological data within the context of virtual environment settings [Rahman et al. 2022 ]. One gap in physiology-based stress detection is the availability of public datasets. While several databases focusing on emotion recognition are available, including one for emotion recognition in virtual reality [Tabbaa et al. 2021 ], there are only 3 public datasets with physiological data that are specifically aimed at stress detection [Bota et al. 2019 ]. The Detecting Stress During Real-World Driving Tasks ( DSDRWDT ) dataset consists of data from 24 participants with each participant driving between 50 minutes and 1.5 hours. The physiological data is labeled as low, medium, or high stress based on ECG, EDA, electromyography ( EMG ), and respiration data and were compared to self-report questionnaires [Healey and Picard 2005 ]. The Real World Driving to Assess Driver Workload ( RWDADW ) dataset contains acceleration, skin temperature, EDA, and heart rate data from 10 subjects who drove for 30 minutes in different conditions. The driver’s workload was annotated using video analysis after the completion of the study [Schneegass et al. 2013 ]. WESAD had 15 participants watch baseline and funny videos and then had participants do the Trier Social Stress Test [von Dawans et al. 2011 ] in a lab setting while wearing an Empatica E4 and a chest strap which collected acceleration, ECG, EDA, EMG, respiration, skin temperature and photoplethysmogram ( PPG ) heart rate related data. The data was labeled based on self-reports from the participants using a variety of questionnaires [Schmidt et al. 2018 ]. Current literature has no datasets available to explore the physiological response during simulated interviews. There is also a lack of publicly available datasets that explore the physiological stress response of autistic young adults with wearable sensors. Our current work aims at addressing the scarcity of available datasets for stress detection and provide a novel dataset that can be used to explore stress trends in autistic adults during a simulated interview. 2.3 Data Visualization In order to provide useful and meaningful interpretations of affective data, it is necessary to present the data in a clear and understandable way. Personal visualization has been used to provide users with their affective data [Xue et al. 2019 ]. AffectAura used physiology to predict the users’ affective state and provide a visualization of their valence, arousal, and engagement in the context of their environment, as determined by audio, visual, and contextual data. Users were able to use the visualization of the data to reflect on their emotional experience and predict future experiences [McDuff et al. 2012 ]. Both Affective Health[Sanches et al. 2010 ] and the work presented by Kocielnik et al. [ 2013 ] visualized data for self-reflection by the user. A triaxial accelerometer, skin conductance sensor, and a three-lead ECG measured and transmitted data to be presented as a spiral, which allowed the participant to reflect on their context and how it may be influencing their ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. Stress Detection of Autistic Adults 2:7 Fig. 1. Process of creating a predictive model from CIRVR. perceived stress levels, as established by the biosensor data [Sanches et al. 2010 ]. Work presented in Kocielnik et al. [ 2013 ] linked galvanic skin response ( GRS ) data with the user’s calendar events in order to provide a visual graph that presented each calendar event as a pie chart showing what percentage of the event corresponded with five different levels of arousal. AffectiveWall aimed at not only allowing personal reflection, but to also encourage workplace reflection during collaboration. Heart rate variability data was used to determine stress which was then presented anonymously on a collective visualization. This allowed the participants to increase their awareness of their own stress while also bringing attention to the overall stress level of the entire group. AffectiveWall showed the importance of presenting the visualized data in a manner that allows for individuals to obtain insights into others’ affect level [Xue et al. 2019 ]. Researchers in Holzinger et al. [ 2013 ] presented an interactive visualization of physiological data in a star-plot. They found that leading psychologists were able to appropriately interpret the data without context of the individual from whom the data was collected. Eye gaze data from a simulated interview was presented by Breen et al. [ 2021 ] in the form of heatmaps and scatter plots to demonstrate how an autistic individuals eye gaze patterns may deviate from that of their neurotypical peers during a job interview. By providing data visualization, these works provide a foundation that opens the door for conversations on how personal and workplace interactions can be adapted to reduce stress and other affective states. We aim at providing these insights to both the interviewer and the interviewers to shape a future of more inclusive interviewing standards. 3 SYSTEM DESCRIPTION Career Interview Readiness in Virtual Reality ( CIRVR ) was designed as a platform that allows interviewees to practice interviewing skills with a focus on effective communication regarding their strengths, work and educational background, and their technical skills [Adiani et al. 2022 ]. In order to provide stress insights to users, it is necessary to be able to predict stress. As discussed previously, physiological data allows for low-cost stress detection, however, there currently exists no physiology-based stress detection model for autistic adults. To create a model, users were asked to complete the CIRVR simulated interview while wearing a wristband to collect physiological data. The stress levels of the users were labeled by a trained behavior analyst and those ground truth labels were used to create models using machine learning. The following sections describe in detail the process shown in Figure 1 . 3.1 Career Interview Readiness in Virtual Reality (CIRVR) CIRVR was developed in Unity [Unity Technologies 2022 ] with four major components based on participatory design principles by incorporating feedback from not only job coaches and career counselors, but also from autistic job candidates [Adiani et al. 2022 ]. The first component is a ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. 2:8 M. Migovich et al. Fig. 2. System setup of CIRVR. virtual office environment and a virtual avatar with which the interviewee interacts, as can be seen in Figure 2 . A conversation management system acts as the second component and is used to execute the interview script and process the responses of the participant using natural language processing, largely enabled by Microsoft Azure Cloud services [Microsoft 2022 ]. The third component is composed of serval peripherals including headphones and a microphone, the Tobii eye tracker [Tobii 2022 ] for eye-gaze monitoring, a web-camera for facial image capture and video input, and an Empatica E4 wristband [Empatica Inc 2022 ] for measuring physiological input. The final component is the data visualization platform [Adiani et al. 2022 ]. The system is designed for both immersive (head-mounted display) and non-immersive virtual environments. However, some autistic users have an aversion to head-mounted displays [Bradley and Newbutt 2018 ], and therefore we used the non-immersive, desktop version for this application. For the purposes of this article, we will focus on the data collected by the Empatica E4 and the visualization of the stress data derived from the physiological signals. To mimic a traditional interview, the simulated interview is formatted with multiple sections, summarized in Table 1 . It begins with general introductions and greetings and proceeds to technical experience and educational background questions. These questions are asked verbally and require a verbal response. In addition to the oral questions, some technical questions and educational questions are asked on a virtual whiteboard to provide a means of non-verbal communication, as requested by autistic job seekers [Adiani et al. 2022 ]. The interview ends with personal questions that aim at allowing the user to practice answering questions about their ideal work environment and how they have navigated difficult situations in prior workplaces. Insights from the job seekers and job coaches identified two situations, interruptions (e.g., a phone call, knock on the door) and being given a time limit, that cause distress in the interviewees, and thus functionality to simulate ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. Stress Detection of Autistic Adults 2:9 Table 1. Examples of Each Section of the Interview Interview Component Example Greeting “Good afternoon! Thank you so much for coming in.” Previous Work “Do you have any prior work experience?” Technical “Do you have experience using word processing software such as Apple Pages or Microsoft Word? Education “What subject did you most enjoy in school? Personal “Tell me about a time you had to handle a situation with a difficult co-worker” Questions “Do you have any questions for me about this job or our organization?” Fig. 3. Distribution of ground truth labels obtained from trained behavioral analyst. these situations was added to the system. Further details of the development of the VR system and initial results can be found in previous publications [Adiani et al. 2022 , 2023 ]. 3.2 Ground Truth Labels A Registered Behavior Technician ( RBT ) [BACB 2022 ], with certification in behavior analysis and training with autistic young adults, manually labeled videos of the CIRVR virtual interview in 15 second increments to establish the ground truth labels. The analyst rated the stress on a level of 1–10 with a score of five or less indicating no presence of stress and a score of 6 or higher indicating the presence of rising stress. For the training of the machine learning models, the ground truth labels were backfilled for the full 15 minutes before the label was given and converted into three classes. Labels between 1 and 3 were grouped as low stress and labels between 4 and 6 were classed as medium stress. Labels above 6 were categorized into the high stress class. The distribution of the ground truth labels is shown in Figure 3 . 3.3 Collection of Physiological Data Physiological data were collected from the Empatica E4 [Empatica Inc 2022 ; Garbarino et al. 2014 ] wristband during the simulated virtual interviews. The participants were asked to wear the E4 on ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. 2:10 M. Migovich et al. their non-dominant wrist and were asked to place their wrist either on the desk or their lap to reduce noise from excessive motion. The E4 captures data from a photoplethysmography ( PPG ) sensor, an electrodermal activity ( EDA ) sensor, an infrared thermopile, and a 3-axis accelerometer. The PPG sensor uses both red and green light in order to maximize the pulse wave detection by measuring the volumetric variations of blood circulation [Empatica Inc 2021b ; Ghamari 2018 ]. Both lights are oriented toward the skin on the wrist, allowing the light to be absorbed and reflected back. A photodetector in the PPG is used to measure the reflected light. The measurements of reflection taken during the green light exposure are typically a sequence of valleys, due to the high light absorption during a heartbeat. These valleys can be correlated to and used to estimate heartbeats. The red light creates a reference light level that is used to cancel out motion artifacts that can impact the pulse wave [Empatica Inc 2021b ]. The E4 passes the measured light reflection through a proprietary algorithm that outputs the blood volume pulse ( BVP ). This is stored in a CSV file, sampled at 64 Hz. From the BVP, both inter beat interval ( IBI ) and heart rate are computed. The IBI data is output intermittently with 1/64 second resolution and are stored to a CSV file, while the heart rate file contains the average heart rate values over the span of ten seconds. These average heart rates are sampled at 1Hz and are also stored in a CSV file. Electrodermal activity is measured based on electrical changes on the surface of skin, produced by innervating signals from the brain. The E4 passes a miniscule amount of current between two electrodes that are in contact with the wrist. The device is then able to measure changes in electrical conductance as pores on the bottom of the wrist are filled with sweat [Empatica 2021 ]. The data from the EDA sensor are stored in a CSV file sampled at 4 Hz with the data points being measured in microSiemens ( μS ). Skin conductance is typically characterized by tonic skin conductance level and phasic skin conductance responses, which are derived from the EDA data. The process of extracting these features will be discussed in Section 3.4 . The infrared thermopile measures skin temperature on a scale of −40 to 115 ° Celsius. The temperature data are sampled at 4 Hz and like the other data, are also stored in a CSV file. Acceleration data are collected from an onboard 3-axis micromachined microelectromechanical system ( MEMS ) accelerometer. MEMS accelerometers are used to measure linear motion without a fixed reference [Sensing 2022 ]. The E4 measures continuous gravitational force (g) applied to each of the three special dimensions (x, y, and z) on a scale of ± 2g sampled at 32 Hz [Empatica Inc 2021a ]. The data for all three directions are then saved to an excel file in the unit of 1/64g. Accelerometer data can be a good indicator of physical activity, which provides auxiliary information that is useful for stress detection [Strath et al. 2005 ; Sun et al. 2012 ]. After each session, all the data is zipped to a file and downloaded to be preprocessed. 3.4 Data Processing The processing of the data begins with loading all the CSV files generated in a session into a Jupyter Notebook [Jupyter Team n.d. ] to sync them. Each CSV file begins with the Unix timestamp. This timestamp is converted into Universal Time Coordinated ( UTC ) time and the sampling rate of each data type is used to generate timestamps for the length of the session. Once the timestamps have been generated, the files are concatenated into a dataframe. The raw data are processed to extract specific features that are chosen based on prior work in the field [Bian et al. 2019 ; Migovich et al. 2021 ]. EDA is decomposed into tonic and phasic components. The tonic skin conductance is considered to be the level of conductance when not responding to external stimuli. From the tonic skin conductance, the skin conductance level ( SCL ) is extracted as the raw level of conductance. Skin conductance responses ( SCRs ) are made up of phasic skin conductance measurements that are associated with events and stimuli. These phasic changes tend to show up as abrupt increases in ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. Stress Detection of Autistic Adults 2:11 Table 2. Physiological Features Extracted from Empatica E4 Physiological Signal Feature Unit of Measurement Photoplethysmography (PPG) Mean Value of Heart Rate Beats per min (bpm) Standard Deviation of Heart Rate No Unit Mean Value of Blood Volume Pulse No Unit Standard Deviation of Blood Volume Pulse No Unit Mean Value of Interbeat Interval Seconds Standard Deviation of Interbeat Interval No Unit Electrodermal Activity (EDA) Mean of the skin conductance level (SCL), which gives a moving baseline of the EDA microSiemns ( μS) Standard Deviation of SCL No unit Skin Conductance Response (SCR) Rate gives the stimuli sensitive peaks found from the EDA data Response Peak/s Mean of the Skin Conductance Response (SCR) Response Peak/s Standard Deviation of SCR No Unit SCR Max Response Peak/s Temperature Mean Value of Temperature Degrees Celsius Standard Deviation of Temperature No Unit 3-axis Accelerometer Mean Value of Acceleration in X Direction 1/64 gravitational force Standard Deviation of Acceleration in X Direction No Unit Mean Value of Acceleration in Y Direction 1/64 gravitational force Standard Deviation of Acceleration in Y Direction No Unit Mean Value of Acceleration in Z Direction 1/64 gravitational force Standard Deviation of Acceleration in Z Direction No Unit the measurement of skin conductance and appear as peaks in the measured data [Empatica 2021 ]. In order to extract the desired components, the method laid out in [Bian et al. 2019 ] is used. First, in order to preprocess the EDA data, a lowpass filter with a 0.5 Hz cutofffrequency is used to remove noisy data. Next, a highpass filter with a 0.05 Hz cutoff frequency is used to isolate the SCL and the SCL is stored in the dataframe with the other physiological data. The SCRs are calculated by subtracting the SCL from the preprocessed signal and are also stored in the dataframe. Rolling windows are used to create subsets within a larger dataset. In the case of physiological data, this is useful because it allows for an in-depth look at the response to specific events and stimuli, as opposed to the average response over the entire session. A five second window with a one second stride length was used for this analysis. Due to the inconsistent sampling rates of the sensors in the E4, it was necessary to interpolate the missing data with the mean of the rolling window. Once the missing data was interpolated, the standard deviation and mean of each window was calculated and stored as the final features for each data type. The extracted features and their units can be seen in Table 2 . 3.5 Stress Detection using Machine Learning 3.5.1 Machine Learning Techniques. The term machine learning refers to the concept of using computational algorithms in order to emulate human intelligence by building a model that can represent the given dataset [El Naqa et al. 2015 ; Nasteski 2017 ]. Supervised machine learning uses a dataset that has features and labels in order to develop a model that is able to learn the classification system already implemented by the labels [Nasteski 2017 ]. The model is trained on a subset of the data where both the features and labels are provided. The model is then tested on a separate subsection of the data the model has not seen in order to evaluate the performance of the model. ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. 2:12 M. Migovich et al. Supervised machine learning is especially applicable when features within the same class have large variations, but still possess fundamental qualities that distinguish them [El Naqa et al. 2015 ]. Variations in features are expected in physiological data as responses to stress can differ depending on many factors, such as age, activity level, and caffeine intake. For this reason, supervised machine learning was used to create our stress detection model. Within supervised machine learning there are two types of algorithms used for model training. Classification algorithms predict a discrete class label that is a finite value that can be counted. Regression algorithms output predictions that are continuous with an infinite number of possible values [Jiang et al. 2020 ]. When labeling human affect, such as stress, discrete labels are used by trained behavior experts as it is not possible for a human labeler to provide continuous labels. Previous work has shown that it is possible to output accurate continuous predictions from discrete training labels [Beyer et al. 2015 ], therefore we chose to use regression algorithms to output continuous label predictions based on the discrete labels provided by a trained behavior expert. This allowed for a more fine-tuned analysis of changes in stress. 3.5.2 Individual Models and Group Model Validation Methods. For individual models, an 80/20 split was used where 80% of the data were used for training and 20% of the data were used for testing. To minimize overlap in testing and training data, the data was not shuffled prior to the split. Five algorithms were tested with individual models. Along with accuracy and F1 score, the distribution of predictions was analyzed to ensure that the model’s performance was not skewed by overfitting. While individual models tend to be more accurate and are preferred with highly individualized data, such as physiological data, it is not always possible to create individual models, especially in situations where the user may not return for a second session. In order to address this limitation, group models are used. Traditional group models are evaluated by creating one large shuffled dataset of all of the available data and using k-fold cross-validation to split the data into k groups and using the groups to create training and holdout test sets. The accuracy of each fold is averaged to determine the overall model accuracy [Roberts et al. 2017 ]. However, this method does not account for differences in physiological responses between individuals as the training and testing sets are a mix of multiple individuals. To address this, leave-one-out cross validation ( LOOCV ) was used. In LOOCV, the data from N-1 participants is used to create the training set. One participant’s data is held out and used as the test set. The process of training and testing is repeated until every participant has been used as the test set. The accuracy and F1 scores are determined by averaging the model evaluation scores for each participant’s test set. The same five algorithms were tested with the individual models and group models. The predictions from the group model with the highest accuracy without overfitting were used for the data visualization. 3.6 Data Visualization The stress data are visualized in two ways. First, a line graph is used to show the change in stress over the course of the interview. Markers are used to show when a question was asked by the interviewer and when the user responded. The line graph also shows the average stress of the current participant as a line across the graph, as well as the overall average stress of all the participants during the duration of the interview. The example in Figure 4 below shows the line graph of stress with the blue vertical lines indicating when the interviewer asked a question. The average stress level of all users is shown with a red horizontal line and the average stress of the current participant is shown with a green line. The black line shows the predictions that are output by the model every second with continuous labels. To visualize the hierarchical relationship of the interview by sections, a sunburst is used. The sunburst shows the relationship between data using nested rings with the root concept in the ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. Stress Detection of Autistic Adults 2:13 Fig. 4. Line Graph showing user stress over the duration of the simulated CIRVR interview. Fig. 5. (a) An overview of the entire interview as a sunburst showing the average stress during each section as a color gradient. (b) Personal section of the interview expanded to show which questions within the personal section were the most stressful. center [Gong et al. 2013 ; Stasko and Zhang 2000 ]. The rings in this case represent the different sections of the interview. Each section can be further expanded to show more detailed relationships within each subsection. The stress values are represented on a color gradient from green, representing low stress, to red, representing high stress. The sunburst provides a rapid visual method for determining which sections and questions resulted in the highest stress. As can be seen in Figure 5 (b), a specific question within the personal section caused a spike in stress for the participant. Lastly, for each participant, the data across each section is averaged and displayed in a chart, as can be seen in Figure 6 . This provides insight into which section was the most stressful for that individual. These charts can also be used to find the overall most stressful section for all the participants, which will be shown in the Results section. 4 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND PARTICIPANTS During a feasibility study for CIRVR, physiological data were collected from 15 autistic young adults (mean age = 19.5, standard deviation = ± 3.09). Additional demographic information is shown in Table 3 . Of the 15 participants, four were female, two were African American, and three were Hispanic. All participants had a diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder from licensed clinical ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. 2:14 M. Migovich et al. Fig. 6. Average stress for a participant shown by section of an interview. Table 3. Demographic Information for All Participants Participant ID Age Gender PID02 20 F PID04 20 M PID05 19 M PID06 18 M PID07 18 M PID10 21 M PID14 17 M PID16 25 G PID17 18 G PID19 18 M PID20 17 F PID21 26 M PID22 20 M PID23 27 M PID24 17 M psychologists prior to being recruited for the study, in accordance with the inclusion criteria. Other inclusion criteria included verbal and written fluency in English, and at least 16 years or older in order to fulfil the age limit for full-time employment in the state in which the study took place. All of the participants completed a job interview for a Data Entry position while wearing an E4 on their non-dominant wrist. Video recordings of the sessions were taken for off-line manual ground truth labeling. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board ( IRB ) of the authors’ university and consent/assent were obtained prior to the beginning of the study. 5 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 5.1 Individual Models Across the five algorithms tested, Elastic Net Regression had the highest performance for individual models with an accuracy of 84.8% and an F1 score of 0.85. The other algorithms had accuracies ranging from 74.7% to 78.2%, as shown in Table 4 . Elastic Net Regression was the only algorithm that resulted in an accuracy and F1 score above 0.8 and had the highest precision and recall scores at 0.87 and 0.84 respectively. Elastic Net Regression is a type of linear regression that performs regularization and variable selection simultaneously by using the penalties from both lasso and ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. Stress Detection of Autistic Adults 2:15 Table 4. Accuracy and F1 Scores for Five Algorithms Trained and Tested on an 80/20 split for Individual Models with 3 Labels Algorithm Accuracy Precision Recall F1 Score Gradient Boosting Regression 78.2 0.83 0.77 0.79 Elastic Net Regression 84.8 0.89 0.84 0.85 Bayesian Ridge Regression 78.5 0.79 0.79 0.78 XGBoost Regressor 74.7 0.86 0.73 0.77 Support Vector Regression 78.2 0.83 0.77 0.79 Table 5. Accuracy and F1 Scores for Five Algorithms using Leave-One-Out Cross Validation for Group Models with 3 Labels Algorithm Accuracy Precision Recall F1 Score Gradient Boosting Regression 67.5 0.57 0.66 0.61 Elastic Net Regression 75.9 0.56 0.75 0.64 Bayesian Ridge Regression 72.5 0.57 0.72 0.63 XGBoost Regressor 58.4 0.57 0.57 0.57 Support Vector Regression 75.4 0.59 0.75 0.64 ridge techniques, which allows it to regularize the regression model [Friedman et al. 2010 ; Inc. n.d. ; Zou and Hastie 2005 ]. Elastic Net Regression has been used with physiological data for other predictions [Hogervorst et al. 2014 ; Signorini et al. 2020 ] and is found to be useful when features are interdependent [Huffaker et al. 2018 ] as the key roles of elastic net include grouping and variable selection. It is also a useful method when there is more dimensional data than samples used [Inc. n.d.], which is often the case with the data from a single CIRVR session as each session only lasts about 20 minutes and only 80% of that data is used for the training of the model. Individual models are typically the preferred method of physiological stress prediction because they are able to account for the various differences in physiological responses between individuals. However, it is not always possible to use individual models due to the additional labor and time necessary to produce them. The participant would have to come in for a pre-model session in which they complete the interview while wearing the E4. Then, an RBT would need to provide ground truth labels for that individual so that a model could be produced. Both of these steps would delay the training and the additional cost of paying a RBT to provide labels for each individual negates the advantage of producing individual models in this context. In order to provide stress recognition without the need for individual models, group models are a useful alternative. 5.2 Group Models For group models, Elastic Net Regression had the highest accuracy and F1 score, shown in Table 5 . However, the distribution of predictions from Elastic Net Regression showed overfitting. As discussed in the previous section, Elastic Net Regression is useful when a smaller sample size is used for training. With LOOCV, the training data consists of all the data from the 16 participants that are not being used as the test set. This greatly increases the sample size, meaning that Elastic Net Regression is no longer the preferred method. Therefore, Support Vector Regression, with an accuracy of 75.4%, a precision score of 0.59, and recall score of 0.75, and an F1 score of 0.64 is considered the best algorithm. Support Vector Regression is contrived as an optimization problem that works by finding a best fit line using a hyperplane and fitting the best line within a threshold [Raj 2022 ; Awad and Khanna 2015 ]. Support Vector Regression is ideal for our physiological stress detection in group models because it has good generalization capabilities and has shown promise in other ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. 2:16 M. Migovich et al. Table 6. Table Showing Average Stress for all Participants Across the Interview Sections on a Continuous Scale from 0–2 Section Average Stress Across all Participants Greeting 0.971333 Previous Work 0.982667 Technical 0.992 Education 0.973333 Personal 0.993333 Questions 1.002308 Fig. 7. Box-and-Whisker plot showing the variation and average stress for each section. works as a means of fitting emotions to a trend curve using physiology [Chang et al. 2013 ] and as a means of predicting emotions in order to adapt an E-Learning system [Wu and Wang 2013 ]. Although the accuracy of group models is lower when compared to individual models, the group models require less labor and can be applied to any new participant without the delay that would be required with an individual model. It is also important to note that this accuracy with 3 classes has the potential improve with the addition of other physiological features and multimodal data, such as eye gaze and speech. 5.3 Data Visualization From the stress by section portion of the data visualization, average stress for each section across all participants was calculated. Table 6 shows the average predicted stress value for each section. When participants were asked if they had any additional questions about the job or interview, they experienced the highest stress level with a rating of 1.00, with the personal section following closely behind with a rating of 0.993. However, the differences in stress seem to be negligible across the group when looking at the averages. In order to glean more insight, Figure 7 shows a comparison of the values as a box-and-whisker plot where variation in stress between participants across question section is depicted. Overall, open-ended sections that do not have a single correct answer tend to produce more stress in autistic individuals [Panicker and Gayathri 2019 ; Roberts et al. 2017 ]. This belief is further validated by looking at individual interviews. ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. Stress Detection of Autistic Adults 2:17 Fig. 8. One participants variation in stress during each interview section. When looking at the distribution and variation of stress for an individual participant (shown in Figure 8 ), this participant experienced the most varied stress during the personal section, including multiple points on the high range of their stress. This pinpoints how specific questions within interview sections drive high stress and may serve as points for training or adapting interview questions and processes. The sunburst in Figure 9 (a) shows multiple high stress points in the personal section, denoted by the red sections. The timeline in Figure 9 (b) shows participant stress spiked at this time, from around 1.00 to almost 2, indicating high stress. Using the sunburst, we are able to identify exactly which section of the dialogue is associated with these spikes. During the personal section, the interviewees are asked a series of questions about times that they navigated change or dealt with a difficult team member. Open ended questions with no singular correct answer, such as those asked in the personal section, have been identified as an area where autistic individuals struggle [Rapin and Dunn 1997 ]. The ability to identify these trends is one of the major contributions of physiological stress detection to simulated interview systems. The future of job seeking, for both autistic and neurotypical individuals, will incorporate a variety of virtual interview platforms. During the COVID-19 pandemic, many interviews were carried out remotely over video chat along with an increase of technologies for flexible hiring such as HireVue [HireVue n.d. ]. In order to maximize the benefits of simulated interviews, it is important to be able to measure stress using non-invasive methods. This is especially essential for autistic individuals due to the fact that a high percentage of this population is under or unemployed and have identified the interview as one of the major barriers to employment. Therefore, identifying areas of the interview that cause acute stress in ways that can compromise interview performance and providing strategies for stress reduction and emotion regulation to the autistic interviewee can improve their employment outcomes. The information gathered is also valuable to employers for adaptations to interviews that may reduce stress and be more inclusive of neurodiversity. The contribution of a dataset that specifically includes physiological data of autistic individuals along with ground truth labels from a registered behavioral analyst provides a foundation for further applications of physiology-based affective computing for autistic individuals. For example, our data enables expanding the arousal state-based exposure therapy proposed by Rahman and ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. 2:18 M. Migovich et al. Fig. 9. (a) full interview sunburst for one participant, (b) line graph showing spike in stress during the interview, (c) chat log with correlated with stress spike, (d) sunburst zoomed in to show section correlated with high stress. colleagues [ 2022 ] and the physiological state-based music therapy recommendations for autistic children [Akinloye et al. 2020 ]. The ability to non-invasively measure stress also presents the opportunity to develop interventions that are specifically tailored to the autistic individual and can be adaptive, including learning technologies that can autonomously increment the difficulty of material to promote engagement and reduce stress. It may also be possible to integrate physiology-based stress detection into existing behavioral therapies, providing a specialist insight into stress levels before any visible cues are present and minimize adverse consequences of interventions. In future work, we hope to expand upon the analysis using the data visualization tool in order to provide job coaches and interviewers with suggestions on ways to adapt interviews for autistic individuals as well as provide feedback to autistic interviewees on methods of stress management during interviews. Future work will also address the limitations of the physiological feature set used by exploring other features within heart rate variability and electrodermal activity. While there was no data loss due to non-compliance with wearing the physiological sensor during this study, it is important to note that future studies should account for sensitives in the autistic population that may interfere with the use of wearable physiological sensors. Therefore, following work from several researchers [McDuff et al. 2016 ; Verkruysse et al. 2008 ; Wu et al. 2012 ], future work will explore the use of non-contact, webcam-based methods for extracting physiological signals such as heart rate and electrodermal activity. The addition of multimodal inputs such as eye gaze and speech analysis will also be considered as methods of improving the accuracy of the current stress prediction model. ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. Stress Detection of Autistic Adults 2:19 While exploring the addition of new inputs, it is also important to maintain transparency and interpretability with machine learning, especially for affective detection. Within the context of CIRVR, considering that this work aims at providing data visualization of stress patterns of autistic individuals, it is important to use transparent feature extraction and algorithms. For these reasons, explainable artificial intelligence ( XAI ) has gained support, especially for uses in education and healthcare [Bernardo and Seva 2023 ; Cortinas-Lorenzo and Lacey 2023 ], and has been shown to have positive applications in physiology-based stress detection [Banerjee et al. 2023 ]. XAI promotes transparency and interpretability within machine learning applications, to ensure that the predictions made by the models are not biased. While our current work employs some methods of XAI, such as feature transparency and prediction visualization, future work will implement more XAI method, including feature importance rating, use of inherently interpretable algorithms, and Interpretable Model-Agnostic Explanations ( LIME ). 6 CONCLUSION The current work presents a novel dataset of physiological data and ground truth stress labels for 15 autistic individuals during CIRVR, a simulated virtual reality interview. This dataset addresses a large gap in current literature as there are not currently publicly available datasets that explore the physiological response to stress for this population. We believe that this dataset can help improve research in stress response during simulated interviews and other contexts. Along with the dataset, this current work validates the use of physiological stress detection for autistic individuals, with a leave-one-out cross validation accuracy of 75.4% for a group. Using data visualization techniques, we were also able to identify sections of the interview that may be considered more stressful to this population. The dataset can be obtained by contacting the corresponding author or by visiting lab.vanderbilt. edu/rasl and completing the form under the Dataset and/or Code Request page. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors would like to thank the Vanderbilt Kennedy Center’s Treatment and Research Institute for Autism Spectrum Disorder ( TRIAD ) with additional thanks to Megan Lanthier for her support. The authors would also like to acknowledge the efforts of other members of the Robotics and Autonomous Systems Lab for their continued work on the RASL Physio Library, with a special thank you to Nibraas Khan for leading the effort. Thank you to all of the participants for their time. REFERENCES Deeksha Adiani, Michael Breen, Miroslava Migovich, Joshua Wade, Spencer Hunt, Mahrukh Tauseef, Nibraas Khan, Kelley Colopietro, Megan Lanthier, and Amy Swanson. 2024. Multimodal job interview simulator for training of autistic individuals. Assist. Technol. 36, 1 (2024), 22–39. https://doi.org/10.1080/10400435.2023.2188907 Deeksha Adiani, Aaron Itzkovitz, Dayi Bian, Harrison Katz, Michael Breen, Spencer Hunt, Amy Swanson, Timothy J. Vogus, Joshua Wade, and Nilanjan Sarkar. 2022. Career interview readiness in virtual reality (CIRVR): A platform for simulated interview training for autistic individuals and their employers. ACM Trans Access Comput. 15, 1 (2022), 1–28. https://doi.org/10.1145/3505560 Jonathan Aigrain, Michel Spodenkiewicz, Severine Dubuiss, Marcin Detyniecki, David Cohen, and Mohamed Chetouani. 2018. Multimodal stress detection from multiple assessments. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing 9, 4 (2018), 491–506. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2016.2631594 Folasade Oluwayemisi Akinloye, Olumide Obe, and Olutayo Boyinbode. 2020. Development of an affective-based ehealthcare system for autistic children. Scientific African 9 (2020), e00514. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SCIAF.2020. E00514 American Psychiatric Association. 2022. Neurodevelopmental disorders- autism spectrum disorder. In Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders . American Psychiatric Association Publishing. https://doi.org/doi:10.1176/appi.books. 9780890425787.x01 _ Neurodevelopmental _ Disorders ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. 2:20 M. Migovich et al. Connie Anderson, Catherine Butt, and Clare Sarsony. 2021. Young adults on the autism spectrum and early employmentrelated experiences: Aspirations and obstacles. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 51, 1 (2021), 88–105. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/S10803- 020- 04513- 4/TABLES/2 Arushi Arushi, Roberto Dillon, Ai Ni Teoh, and Denise Dillon. 2022. Voice analysis for stress detection and application in virtual reality to improve public speaking in real-time: A review (August 2022). https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2208.01041 Ashwin Raj. 2022. Unlocking the true power of support vector regression | by ashwin raj | towards data science. Retrieved November 30, 2022 ( https://towardsdatascience.com/unlocking- the- true- power- of- support- vector- regression847fd123a4a0 ) Mariette Awad and Rahul Khanna. 2015. Support vector regression. In Efficient Learning Machines: Theories, Concepts, and Applications for Engineers and System Designers . Apress, Berkeley, CA, 67–80. https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 1- 4302- 5990- 9 BACB. 2022. REGISTERED BEHAVIOR TECHNICIAN - Behavior Analyst Certification Board. Retrieved November 28, 2022 ( https://w w w.bacb.com/rbt/ ) Jyoti Sekhar Banerjee, Mufti Mahmud, and David Brown. 2023. Heart rate variability-based mental stress detection: An explainable machine learning approach. SN Computer Science 4, 2 (2023), 1–10. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/S42979022- 01605- Z/TABLES/3 Morris D. Bell and Andrea Weinstein. 2011. Simulated job interview skill training for people with psychiatric disability: feasibility and tolerability of virtual reality training. Schizophr. Bull. 37, suppl_2 (September 2011), S91–S97. https://doi. org/10.1093/schbul/sbr061 Ezekiel Bernardo and Rosemary Seva. 2023. Affective analysis of explainable artificial intelligence in the development of trust in AI systems. Intell. Hum. Syst. Integr. IHSI 2023 Integrating People Intell. Syst. 69, (2023), 417–427. https://doi.org/ 10.54941/ahfe1002861 Lucas Beyer, Alexander Hermans, and Bastian Leibe. 2015. Biternion nets: Continuous head pose regression from discrete training labels. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 9358 (2015), 157–168. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978- 3- 319- 249476 _ 13 Dayi Bian, Joshua Wade, Amy Swanson, Zachary Warren, and Nilanjan Sarkar. 2015. Physiology-based affect recognition during driving in virtual environment for autism intervention. In Proceedings of the PhyCS 2015 - 2nd International Conference on Physiological Computing Systems . 137–45. Dayi Bian, Joshua Wade, Amy Swanson, Amy Weitlauf, Zachary Warren, and Nilanjan Sarkar. 2019. Design of a physiologybased adaptive virtual reality driving platform for individuals with ASD. ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing 12, 1 (2019). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3301498 Patrícia J. Bota, Chen Wang, Ana L. N. Fred, and Hugo Plácido Da Silva. 2019. A review, current challenges, and future possibilities on emotion recognition using machine learning and physiological signals. IEEE Access 7 (2019), 140990– 141020. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2944001 Ryan Bradley and Nigel Newbutt. 2018. Autism and virtual reality head-mounted displays: A state of the art systematic review. Journal of Enabling Technologies 12, 3 (2018), 101–13. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1108/JET- 01- 2018- 0004 Michael Breen, James McClarty, Caleb Langley, Jamshid Farzidayeri, Kyle Trevethan, Brandon Swenson, Medha Sarkar, Joshua Wade, and Nilanjan Sarkar. 2021. 2D and 3D visualization of eye gaze patterns in a VR-Based job interview simulator: Application in educating employers on the gaze patterns of autistic candidates. International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction LNCS 12768 (2021), 533–44. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3- 030- 78092- 0 _ 36/ Shanna L. Burke, Tammy Bresnahan, Tan Li, Katrina Epnere, Albert Rizzo, Mary Partin, Robert M. Ahlness, and Matthew Trimmer. 2018. Using virtual interactive training agents (ViTA) with adults with autism and other developmental disabilities. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 48, 3 (2018), 905–912. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803- 017- 3374- z Shanna L. Burke, Tan Li, Adrienne Grudzien, and Stephanie Garcia. 2020. Brief report: Improving employment interview self-efficacy among adults with autism and other developmental disabilities using virtual interactive training agents (ViTA). Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 1–8. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803- 020- 04571- 8 John T. Cacioppo, Louis G. Tassinary, and Gary G. Berntson. 2017. Handbook of Psychophysiology . (4th ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Rafael A. Calvo, Sidney D’Mello, Jonathan Matthew Gratch, and Arvid Kappas. 2015. The Oxford Handbook of Affective Computing . Oxford Library of Psychology. Chuan Yu Chang, Chuan Wang Chang, Jun Ying Zheng, and Pau Choo Chung. 2013. Physiological emotion analysis using support vector regression. Neurocomputing 122 (2013), 79–87. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/J.NEUCOM.2013.02.041 Dongrae Cho, Jinsil Ham, Jooyoung Oh, Jeanho Park, Sayup Kim, Nak Kyu Lee, and Boreom Lee. 2017. Detection of stress levels from biosignals measured in virtual reality environments using a kernel-based extreme learning machine. Sensors 17, 10 (2017), 2435. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3390/S17102435 Sheldon Cohen, Tom Kamarck, and Robin Mermelstein. 1994. Perceived stress scale. Measuring Stress: A Guide for Health and Social Scientists 10, 2 (1994), 1–2. ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. Stress Detection of Autistic Adults 2:21 Karina Cortiñas-Lorenzo and Gerard Lacey. 2023. Toward explainable affective computing: A review. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. (2023), 1–0. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3270027 Krešimir Ćosić, Siniša Popović, Davor Kukolja, Marko Horvat, and Branimir Dropuljić. 2010. Physiology-driven adaptive virtual reality stimulation for prevention and treatment of stress related disorders. CyberPsychology Behav. Soc. Netw. 13, 1 (2010), 73–78. https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2009.0260 Bernadette von Dawans, Clemens Kirschbaum, and Markus Heinrichs. 2011. The trier social stress test for groups (TSST-G): A new research tool for controlled simultaneous social stress exposure in a group format. Psychoneuroendocrinology 36, 4 (2011), 514–522. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psyneuen.2010.08.004 David DeVault, Ron Artstein, Grace Benn, Teresa Dey, Ed Fast, Alesia Gainer, Kallirroi Georgila, Jon Gratch, Arno Hartholt, and Margaux Lhommet. 2014. SimSensei Kiosk: A virtual human interviewer for healthcare decision support. In Proceedings of the 2014 International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multi-agent Systems . 1061–68. David DeVault, Kallirroi Georgila, Ron Artstein, Fabrizio Morbini, David Traum, Stefan Scherer, Albert Rizzo, and LouisPhilippe Morency. 2013. Verbal indicators of psychological distress in interactive dialogue with a virtual human. In Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2013 Conference. 22–24. Empatica. 2021. What Should I Know to Use EDA Data in My Experiment? –Empatica Support. Retrieved May 7, 2021 ( https: //support.empatica.com/hc/en- us/articles/203621955- What- should- I- know- to- use- EDA- data- in- my- experiment -) Empatica Inc. 2021a. How Is the acceleration data formatted in E4 connect? –Empatica Support. Retrieved November 9, 2022 ( https://support.empatica.com/hc/en- us/articles/202028739- How- is- the- acceleration- data- formatted- in- E4- connect -) Empatica Inc. 2021b. Utilizing the PPG/BVP Signal – Empatica Support. Retrieved February 21, 2022 ( https://support. empatica.com/hc/en- us/articles/204954639- Utilizing- the- PPG- BVP- signal ) Empatica Inc. 2022. Real-Time Physiological Signals - E4 EDA/GSR Sensor. Retrieved November 9, 2022 ( https://e4.empatica. com/e4-wristband ) Carlton J. Fong, Joshua Taylor, Aynura Berdyyeva, Amanda M. McClelland, Kathleen M. Murphy, and John D. Westbrook. 2021. Interventions for improving employment outcomes for persons with autism spectrum disorders: A systematic review update. Campbell Systematic Reviews 17, 3 (2021), e1185. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/CL2.1185 Bruce H. Friedman. 2010. Feelings and the Body: The jamesian perspective on autonomic specificity of emotion. Biological Psychology 84, 3 (2010), 383–93. Jerome Friedman, Trevor Hastie, and Rob Tibshirani. 2010. Regularization paths for generalized linear models via coordinate descent. Journal of Statistical Software 33, 1 (2010), 1. DOI: https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v033.i01 Andrea Gaggioli, Pietro Cipresso, Silvia Serino, Giovanni Pioggia, Gennaro Tartarisco, Giovanni Baldus, Daniele Corda, Marcello Ferro, Nicola Carbonaro, Alessandro Tognetti, Danilo De Rossi, Dimitris Giakoumis, Dimitrios Tzovaras, Alejandro Riera, and Giuseppe Riva. 2014. A decision support system for real-time stress detection during virtual reality exposure. Studies in Health Technology and Informatics 196 (2014), 114–20. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/978- 1- 61499375- 9- 114 Maurizio Garbarino, Matteo Lai, Dan Bender, Rosalind W. Picard, and Simone Tognetti. 2014. Empatica E3—A wearable wireless multi-sensor device for real-time computerized biofeedback and data acquisition. In Proceedings of the 2014 4th International Conference on Wireless Mobile Communication and Healthcare-Transforming Healthcare Through Innovations in Mobile and Wireless Technologies . IEEE. 39–42. Tony Gentry, Richard Kriner, Adam Sima, Jennifer McDonough, and Paul Wehman. 2015. Reducing the need for personal supports among workers with autism using an IPod touch as an assistive technology: Delayed randomized control trial. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 45, 3 (2015), 669–84. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/S10803- 014- 2221- 8/ TABLES/4 Mohammad Ghamari. 2018. A review on wearable photoplethysmography sensors and their potential future applications in health care. International Journal of Biosensors & Bioelectronics 4, 4 (2018), 195. DOI: https://doi.org/10.15406/ijbsbe. 2018.04.00125 Carly B. Gilson and Erik W. Carter. 2016. Promoting social interactions and job independence for college students with autism or intellectual disability: A pilot study. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 46, 11 (2016), 3583–96. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/S10803- 016- 2894- 2/TABLES/4 Li Wei Gong, Chen Yi, Xin Yue Zhang, and Yue Hong Sun. 2013. A hierarchical data visualization algorithm: Self-Adapting sunburst algorithm. Proceedings of the- 2013 International Conference on Virtual Reality and Visualization. 185–90. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICVRV.2013.36 Shalom Greene, Himanshu Thapliyal, and Allison Caban-Holt. 2016. A survey of affective computing for stress detection: Evaluating technologies in stress detection for better health. IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag. 5, 4 (2016), 44–56. https: //doi.org/10.1109/MCE.2016.2590178 Dirk Hagemann, Shari R. Waldstein, and Julian F. Thayer. 2003. Central and autonomic nervous system integration in emotion. Brain and Cognition 52, 1 (2003), 79–87. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0278- 2626(03)00011- 3 ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. 2:22 M. Migovich et al. Jennifer A. Healey and Rosalind W. Picard. 2005. Detecting stress during real-world driving tasks using physiological sensors. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 6, 2 (2005), 156–166. https://doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2005.848368 Jennifer Anne Healey. 2000. Wearable and automotive systems for affect recognition from physiology. (2000). Doris Adams Hill, Leigh Belcher, Holly E. Brigman, Scott Renner, and Brooke Stephens. 2013. The apple IPad TM as an innovative employment support for young adults with autism spectrum disorder and other developmental disabilities. Journal of Applied Rehabilitation Counseling 44, 1 (2013), 28–37. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1891/0047-2220.44.1.28 HireVue, Inc. n.d. HireVue Hiring Platform: Video Interviews, Assessments, AI, and More. Retrieved November 30, 2022 ( https://w w w.hirevue.com/ ) Maarten A. Hogervorst, Anne Marie Brouwer, and Jan B. F. van Erp. 2014. Combining and comparing EEG, peripheral physiology and eye-related measures for the assessment of mental workload. Frontiers in Neuroscience 8 (2014), 322. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/FNINS.2014.00322/BIBTEX Andreas Holzinger, Manuel Bruschi, and Wolfgang Eder. 2013. On interactive data visualization of physiological low-costsensor data with focus on mental stress. Availability, Reliability, and Security in Information Systems and HCI: IFIP WG 8.4, 8.9, TC 5 International Cross-Domain Conference, CD-ARES 2013, Regensburg, Germany, September 2-6, 2013. Proceedings 8 . 8127 (2013), 469–80. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3- 642- 40511- 2 _ 34/COVER Michelle F. Huffaker, Michael Carchia, Bronwyn U. Harris, William C. Kethman, Todd E. Murphy, Charlotte C. D. Sakarovitch, Fei Fei Qin, and David N. Cornfield. 2018. Passive nocturnal physiologic monitoring enables early detection of exacerbations in children with asthma a proof-of-concept study. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine 198, 3 (2018), 320–28. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1164/RCCM.201712-2606OC/SUPPL _ FILE/DISCLOSURES.PDF Amy E. Hurley-Hanson, Cristina M. Giannantonio, and Amy Jane Griffiths. 2020. Generation A and autism in the workplace. In Autism in the Workplace , Palgrave Macmillan, Cham, 3–19. https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3- 030- 29049- 8 _ 1 Victoria D. Hutchinson, Ruth Anne Rehfeldt, India Hertel, and William B. Root. 2019. Exploring the efficacy of acceptance and commitment therapy and behavioral skills training to teach interview skills to adults with autism spectrum disorders. Advances in Neurodevelopmental Disorders 3, 4 (2019), 450–56. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/S41252- 019- 00136- 8/ FIGURES/1 Inc., CFI Education. n.d. Elastic Net - Over view, Geometr y, and Regularization. Retrieved November 29, 2022 ( https:// corporatefinanceinstitute.com/resources/data- science/elastic- net/ ). Tammy Jiang, Jaimie L. Gradus, and Anthony J. Rosellini. 2020. Supervised machine learning: A brief primer. Behavior Therapy 51, 5 (2020), 675–87. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BETH.2020.05.002 Jupyter Team. n.d. “Jupyter Project Documentation — Jupyter Documentation 4.1.1 Alpha Documentation.” Retrieved November 13, 2022 ( https://docs.jupyter.org/en/latest/index.html ) Chandran Jyotsna and Joseph Amudha. 2018. Eye gaze as an indicator for stress level analysis in students. In International Conference on Advances in Computing, Communications and Informatics (ICACCI’18) . Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 1588–1593. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICACCI.2018.8554715 Connor Tom Keating, Lydia Hickman, Joan Leung, Ruth Monk, Alicia Montgomery, Hannah Heath, and Sophie Sowden. n.d. Autism-Related language preferences across the globe: A mixed methods investigation. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 31234/OSF.IO/859X3 Hye Geum Kim, Eun Jin Cheon, Dai Seg Bai, Young Hwan Lee, and Bon Hoon Koo. 2018. Stress and heart rate variability: A meta-analysis and review of the literature. Psychiatry Investigation 15, 3 (2018), 235–45. Rafal Kocielnik, Natalia Sidorova, Fabrizio Maria Maggi, Martin Ouwerkerk, and Joyce H. D. M. Westerink. 2013. Smart technologies for long-term stress monitoring at work. In Proceedings of the 26th IEEE International Symposium on ComputerBased Medical Systems . Robert W. Levenson. 2014. The autonomic nervous system and emotion. Emotion Review 6, 2 (2014), 100–112. DOI: https: //doi.org/10.1177/1754073913512003 Wenhui Liao, Weihong Zhang, Zhiwei Zhu, and Qiang Ji. 2005. A real-time human stress monitoring system using dynamic bayesian network. In Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops . DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2005.394 Javier Marín-Morales, Juan Luis Higuera-Trujillo, Alberto Greco, Jaime Guixeres, Carmen Llinares, Enzo Pasquale Scilingo, Mariano Alcañiz, and Gaetano Valenza. 2018. Affective computing in virtual reality: emotion recognition from brain and heartbeat dynamics using wearable sensors. Scientific Reports 2018 8:1 8, 1 (2018), 1–15. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41598- 018- 32063- 4 Eric J. Mash and Leif G. Terdal. 1988. Behavioral Assessment of Childhood Disorders . Guilford Press. Julie McCarthy and Richard Goffin. 2004. Measuring job interview anxiety: Beyond weak knees and sweaty palms. Personnel Psychology 57, 3 (2004), 607–37. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/J.1744-6570.2004.00002.X Daniel J. McDuff, Javier Hernandez, Sarah Gontarek, and Rosalind W. Picard. 2016. COGCAM: Contact-Free measurement of cognitive stress during computer tasks with a digital camera. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 4000–4004. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858247 ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. Stress Detection of Autistic Adults 2:23 Daniel McDuff, Amy Karlson, Ashish Kapoor, Asta Roseway, and Mary Czerwinski. 2012. AffectAura: An intelligent system for emotional memory. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Microsoft. 2022. Cloud Computing Services | Microsoft Azure. Retrieved November 9, 2022 ( https://azure.microsoft.com/ en-us/ ). Miroslava Migovich, Deeksha Adiani, Amy Swanson, and Nilanjan Sarkar. 2022. Heart rate variability for stress detection with autistic young adults. HCII 2022: Adaptive Instructional Systems 13332, LNCS (2022), 3–13. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978- 3- 031- 05887- 5 _ 1 Miroslava Migovich, Alex Korman, Joshua Wade, and Nilanjan Sarkar. 2021. Design and validation of a stress detection model for use with a VR based interview simulator for autistic young adults. HCII 2021: Universal Access in HumanComputer Interaction. Design Methods and User Experience 12768, LNISA (2021), 580–588. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/ 10.1007/978- 3- 030- 78092- 0 _ 40 Joyce Montgomery, Keith Storey, Michal Post, and Jacky Lemley. 2011. The use of auditory prompting systems for increasing independent performance of students with autism in employment training. International Journal of Rehabilitation Research. Internationale Zeitschrift Fur Rehabilitationsforschung. Revue Internationale de Recherches de Readaptation 34, 4 (2011), 330–35. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1097/MRR.0B013E32834A8FA8 Issam El Naqa and Martin J. Murphy. 2015. What Is Machine Learning? In Machine Learning in Radiation Oncology . Springer International Publishing, Cham, 3–11. https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3- 319- 18305- 3 _ 1 Vladimir Nasteski. 2017. An overview of the supervised machine learning methods. Horizons. b 4 (2017), 51–62. DOI: https: //doi.org/10.20544/HORIZONS.B.04.1.17.P05 Donny Newsome, Kendra Newsome, Timothy C. Fuller, and Staheli Meyer. 2019. How contextual behavioral scientists measure and report about behavior: A review of JCBS. Journal of Contextual Behavioral Science 12 (2019), 347–354. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcbs.2018.11.005 Jade Eloise Norris, Laura Crane, and Katie Maras. 2020. Interviewing autistic adults: Adaptations to support recall in police, employment, and healthcare interviews. Autism : The International Journal of Research and Practice 24, 6 (2020), 1506–20. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361320909174 Suja Sreeith Panicker and Prakasam Gayathri. 2019. A survey of machine learning techniques in physiology based mental stress detection systems. Biocybernetics and Biomedical Engineering 39, 2 (2019), 444–69. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/J. BBE.2019.01.004 R. W. Picard. 1995. Affective Computing . Cambridge. Jonathan Posner, James A. Russell, and Bradley S. Peterson. 2005. The circumplex model of affect: An integrative approach to affective neuroscience, cognitive development, and psychopathology. Development and Psychopathology 17, 3 (2005), 715. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954579405050340 Muhammad Arifur Rahman, David J. Brown, Nicholas Shopland, Matthew C. Harris, Zakia Batool Turabee, Nadja Heym, Alexander Sumich, Brad Standen, David Downes, Yangang Xing, Carolyn Thomas, Sean Haddick, Preethi Premkumar, Simona Nastase, Andrew Burton, James Lewis, and Mufti Mahmud. 2022. Towards machine learning driven self-guided virtual reality exposure therapy based on arousal state detection from multimodal data. International Conference on Brain Informatics 13406 (2022), 195–209. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3- 031- 15037- 1 _ 17/FIGURES/7 I. Rapin and M. Dunn. 1997. Language disorders in children with autism. Seminars in Pediatric Neurology 4, 2 (1997), 86–92. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S1071- 9091(97)80024- 1 David R. Roberts, Volker Bahn, Simone Ciuti, Mark S. Boyce, Jane Elith, Gurutzeta Guillera-Arroita, Severin Hauenstein, José J. Lahoz-Monfort, Boris Schröder, Wilfried Thuiller, David I. Warton, Brendan A. Wintle, Florian Hartig, and Carsten F. Dormann. 2017. Cross-Validation strategies for data with temporal, spatial, hierarchical, or phylogenetic structure. Ecography 40, 8 (2017), 913–29. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/ECOG.02881 Anne M. Roux, Jessica E. Rast, Kristy A. Anderson, and Paul T. Shattuck. 2017. National autism indicators report: Developmental disability services and outcomes in adulthood. Life Course Outcomes Program AJ Drexel Autism Inst. Drexel Univ . (2017). Pedro Sanches, Kristina Höök, Elsa Vaara, Claus Weymann, Markus Bylund, Pedro Ferreira, Nathalie Peira, and Marie Sjölinder. 2010. Mind the Body! Designing a mobile stress management application encouraging personal reflection. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems . Sarah Sarabadani, Larissa C. Schudlo, Ali Akbar Samadani, and Azadeh Kushski. 2020. Physiological detection of affective states in children with autism spectrum disorder. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing 11, 4 (2020), 588–600. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2018.2820049 Nilanjan Sarkar. 2002. Psychophysiological control architecture for human-robot coordination-concepts and initial experiments. In Proceedings 2002 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation . 3719–24. IEEE. Philip Schmidt, Attila Reiss, Robert Duerichen, and Kristof Van Laerhoven. 2018. Introducing WeSAD, a multimodal dataset for wearable stress and affect detection. In Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Multimodal Interaction . ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. 2:24 M. Migovich et al. Stefan Schneegass, Bastian Pfleging, Nora Broy, Albrecht Schmidt, and Frederik Heinrich. 2013. A data set of real world driving to assess driver workload. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications . Sensing, Silicon. 2022. MEMS Accelerometers | Silicon Sensing. Retrieved November 9, 2022 ( https://w w w.siliconsensing. com/technology/mems-accelerometers/ ) Nandita Sharma and Tom Gedeon. 2012. Objective measures, sensors and computational techniques for stress recognition and classification: A survey. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 108, 3 (2012), 1287–1301. DOI: https://doi. org/10.1016/J.CMPB.2012.07.003 Yuan Shi, Minh Hoai Nguyen, Patrick Blitz, Brian French, Scott Fisk, Fernando De La Torre, Asim Smailagic, and Daniel P. Siewiorek. 2010. Personalized stress detection from physiological measurements. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium on Quality of Life Technology . Lin Shu, Jinyan Xie, Mingyue Yang, Ziyi Li, Zhenqi Li, Dan Liao, Xiangmin Xu, and Xinyi Yang. 2018. A review of emotion recognition using physiological signals. Sensors 18, 7 (2018), 2074. https://doi.org/10.3390/s18072074 Maria G. Signorini, Nicolò Pini, Alberto Malovini, Riccardo Bellazzi, and Giovanni Magenes. 2020. Integrating machine learning techniques and physiology based heart rate features for antepartum fetal monitoring. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 185 (2020), 105015. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CMPB.2019.105015 Elena Smets, Walter De Raedt, and Chris Van Hoof. 2019. Into the Wild: The challenges of physiological stress detection in laboratory and ambulatory settings. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics 23, 2 (2019), 463–73. DOI: https: //doi.org/10.1109/JBHI.2018.2883751 Matthew J. Smith, Michael F. Fleming, Michael A. Wright, Molly Losh, Laura Boteler Humm, Dale Olsen, and Morris D. Bell. 2015. Brief report: Vocational outcomes for young adults with autism spectrum disorders at six months after virtual reality job interview training. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 45, 10 (2015), 3364–69. DOI: https: //doi.org/10.1007/S10803- 015- 2470- 1 Matthew J. Smith, Emily J. Ginger, Katherine Wright, Michael A. Wright, Julie Lounds Taylor, Laura Boteler Humm, Dale E. Olsen, Morris D. Bell, and Michael F. Fleming. 2014. Virtual reality job interview training in adults with autism spectrum disorder. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 44, 10 (2014), 2450–63. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/ S10803- 014- 2113- Y Matthew J. Smith, Kari Sherwood, Brittany Ross, Justin D. Smith, Leann DaWalt, Lauren Bishop, Laura Humm, Jeff Elkins, and Chris Steacy. 2021. Virtual interview training for autistic transition age youth: A randomized controlled feasibility and effectiveness trial. Autism 25. 6 (2021), 1536–52. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361321989928 John Stasko and Eugene Zhang. 2000. Focus +context display and navigation techniques for enhancing radial, space-filling hierarchy visualizations. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization. 57–65. DOI: https://doi.org/ 10.1109/INFVIS.2000.885091 Maike Stoeve, Markus Wirth, Rosanna Farlock, André Antunovic, Victoria Müller, and Bjoern M. Eskofier. 2022. Eye tracking-based stress classification of athletes in virtual reality. Proceedings of the ACM on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques 5, 2 (2022), 17. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3530796 Scott J. Strath, Søren Brage, and Ulf Ekelund. 2005. Integration of physiological and accelerometer data to improve physical activity assessment. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 37, 11 Suppl (November 2005), S563–71. https://doi.org/10.1249/01.mss. 0000185650.68232.3f Dorothy C. Strickland, Claire D. Coles, and Louise B. Southern. 2013. JobTIPS: A transition to employment program for individuals with autism spectrum disorders. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 43, 10 (2013), 2472–83. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/S10803- 013- 1800- 4 Feng Tso Sun, Cynthia Kuo, Heng Tze Cheng, Senaka Buthpitiya, Patricia Collins, and Martin Griss. 2012. Activity-Aware mental stress detection using physiological sensors. MobiCASE 2010: Mobile Computing, Applications, and Services 76, LNICST (2012), 282–301. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3- 642- 29336- 8 _ 16 Luma Tabbaa, Ryan Searle, Saber Mirzaee Bafti, Md Moinul Hossain, Jittrapol Intarasisrisawat, Maxine Glancy, and Chee Siang Ang. 2021. VREED. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 5, 4 (2021), 178. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3495002 Kuan Tao, Yuhan Huang, Yanfei Shen, and Lixin Sun. 2022. Automated stress recognition using supervised learning classifiers by interactive virtual reality scenes. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering 30 (2022), 2060–66. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSRE.2022.3192571 Julie Lounds Taylor, Leann Smith DaWalt, Alison R. Marvin, J. Kiely Law, and Paul Lipkin. 2019. Sex differences in employment and supports for adults with autism spectrum disorder. Autism 23, 7 (2019), 1711–19. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 1177/1362361319827417 Anoushka Thoen, Jean Steyaert, Kaat Alaerts, Kris Evers, and Tine Van Damme. 2023. A systematic review of self-reported stress questionnaires in people on the autism spectrum. Rev J Autism Dev Disord 10, 2 (2023), 295–318. https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s40489- 021- 00293- 4 ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024. Stress Detection of Autistic Adults 2:25 Tobii. 2022. Tobii Gaming | The Next Generation of Head Tracking and Eye Tracking. Retrieved November 9, 2022 ( https: //gaming.tobii.com/ ). Anna Trakoli. 2021. Autism equality in the workplace. Removing barriers and challenging discrimination. Occupational Medicine 71, 1 (2021), 48–48. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/OCCMED/KQAA041 Unity Technologies. 2024. Unity Real-Time Development Platform | 3D, 2D VR & AR Engine. Unity Technologies . Wim Verkruysse, Lars O. Svaasand, and J. Stuart Nelson. 2008. Remote plethysmographic imaging using ambient light. Optics Express 16, 26 (2008), 21434. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1364/oe.16.021434 Joshua Wade, Lian Zhang, Dayi Bian, Jing Fan, Amy Swanson, Amy Weitlauf, Medha Sarkar, Zachary Warren, and Nilanjan Sarkar. 2016. A gaze-contingent adaptive virtual reality driving environment for intervention in individuals with autism spectrum disorders. ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst. TiiS 6, 1 (2016), 1–23. https://doi.org/10.1145/2892636 Joshua A. Waxenbaum, Vamsi Reddy, and Matthew Varacallo. 2022. Anatomy, autonomic nervous system. StatPearls . Paul Wehman, Carol M. Schall, Jennifer McDonough, Carolyn Graham, Valerie Brooke, J. Erin Riehle, Alissa Brooke, Whitney Ham, Stephanie Lau, Jaclyn Allen, and Lauren Avellone. 2017. Effects of an employer-based intervention on employment outcomes for youth with significant support needs due to autism. Autism : The International Journal of Research and Practice 21, 3 (2017), 276–90. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361316635826 Melanie Whetzel. 2014. Interviewing tips for applicants with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation 40, 2 (2014), 155–59. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3233/JVR-140668 Hao Yu Wu, Michael Rubinstein, Eugene Shih, John Guttag, Frédo Durand, and William Freeman. 2012. Eulerian video magnification for revealing subtle changes in the world. ACM Transactions on Graphics 31, 4 (2012), 1–8. DOI: https: //doi.org/10.1145/2185520.2185561 Jin Bin Wu and Wan Sen Wang. 2013. Personalized emotion model based on support vector machine. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management: Assistive Technology of Industrial Engineering. 1519–25. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3- 642- 38391- 5 _ 160/COVER Qingguo Xu, Sen-ching Samson Cheung, and Neelkamal Soares. 2015. LittleHelper: An augmented reality glass application to assist individuals with autism in job interview. In Proceedings of the 2015 Asia-Pacific Signal and Information Processing Association Annual Summit and Conference . IEEE. 1276–79. Mengru Xue, Rong Hao Liang, Bin Yu, Mathias Funk, Jun Hu, and Loe Feijs. 2019. Affective wall: Designing collective stress-related physiological data visualization for reflection. IEEE Access 7 (2019), 131289–303. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 1109/ACCESS.2019.2940866 Lian Zhang, Joshua Wade, Dayi Bian, Jing Fan, Amy Swanson, Amy Weitlauf, Zachary Warren, and Nilanjan Sarkar. 2017. Cognitive load measurement in a virtual reality-based driving system for autism intervention. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing 8, 2 (2017), 176–89. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2016.2582490 Hui Zou and Trevor Hastie. 2005. Regularization and variable selection via the elastic net. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 67, 2 (2005), 301–20. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/J.1467-9868.2005.00503.X Received 16 December 2022; revised 9 October 2023; accepted 18 December 2023 ACM Trans. Access. Comput., Vol. 17, No. 1, Article 2. Publication date: March 2024.